BRAVE NEW WORLDbyAldous Huxley(1894-1963)Chapter OneA SQUAT grey building of only thirt y-four stories. Ov er the main en-trance the words, CENTRAL L ONDON HA TCHER Y AND CONDITIONING CENTRE, and, in a shield, the W orld State's motto , COMMUNITY , IDEN-TITY, STABILITY .The enormous room on the ground floor faced tow ards the north. Cold for all the summer bey ond the panes, for all the tropical heat of the room itself , a harsh thin light glared through the windows, hungrily seeking some dr aped la y figure, some pallid shape of academic goose-flesh, but finding only the glass and nick el and bleakly shining porce-lain of a labor atory. Wintriness responded to wintriness. The o veralls of  the work ers were white, their hands glo ved with a pale corpse-coloured rubber . The light w as froz en, dead, a ghost. Only from the yellow barrels of the microscopes did it borrow a certain rich and living  substance, lying along the polished tubes lik e butter , streak after luscious streak in long recession down the work tables."And this," said the Director opening the door , "is the F ertilizing Room."Bent o ver their instruments, three hundred F ertiliz ers were plunged, as  the Director of Hatcheries and Conditioning entered the room, in the scarcely breathing silence, the absent -minded, soliloquizing hum or whistle, of absorbed concentr ation. A troop of newly arriv ed students, very young, pink and callow , followed nerv ously, rather abjectly , at the  Director's heels. Each of them carried a notebook, in which, whenev er the great man spok e, he desper ately scribbled. Str aight from the horse's mouth. It w as a r are privilege. The D . H. C. for Centr al London always made a point of personally conducting his new students round the various departments."Just to giv e you a gener al idea," he would explain to them. F or of course some sort of gener al idea they must ha ve, if they were to do their work intelligently –though as little of one, if they were to be good and happ y members of societ y, as possible. F or particulars, as ev ery one knows, mak e for virtue and happiness; gener alities are intellectu-ally necessary evils. Not philosophers but fret -sawyers and stamp col-lectors compose the backbone of societ y."To-morrow ," he would add, smiling at them with a slightly menacing genialit y, "you'll be settling down to serious work. Y ou won't ha ve time for gener alities. Mean while …"Mean while, it w as a privilege. Str aight from the horse's mouth into the  notebook. The bo ys scribbled lik e mad.Tall and r ather thin but upright, the Director adv anced into the room. He had a long chin and big r ather prominent teeth, just co vered, when  he was not talking, b y his full, floridly curv ed lips. Old, y oung? Thirt y? Fifty? Fift y-five? It w as hard to sa y. And an yhow the question didn't arise; in this y ear of stabilit y, A. F. 632, it didn't occur to y ou to ask it."I shall begin at the beginning," said the D .H.C. and the more z ealous students recorded his intention in their notebooks: Begin at the begin-ning. "These," he w aved his hand, "are the incubators." And opening an insulated door he showed them r acks upon r acks of numbered test -tubes. "The week's supply of o va. Kept," he explained, "at blood heat; whereas the male gametes," and here he opened another door , "they have to be k ept at thirt y-five instead of thirt y-seven. Full blood heat steriliz es." R ams wr apped in theremogene beget no lambs.Still leaning against the incubators he ga ve them, while the pencils scurried illegibly across the pages, a brief description of the modern fertilizing process; spok e first, of course, of its surgical introduc-tion–"the oper ation undergone v oluntarily for the good of Societ y, not to mention the fact that it carries a bonus amounting to six months' salary"; continued with some account of the technique for preserving the ex cised o vary aliv e and activ ely dev eloping; passed on to a consid-eration of optimum temper ature, salinit y, viscosit y; referred to the liq-uor in which the detached and ripened eggs were k ept; and, leading his charges to the work tables, actually showed them how this liquor was drawn off from the test -tubes; how it w as let out drop b y drop onto the specially w armed slides of the microscopes; how the eggs which it contained were inspected for abnormalities, counted and transferred to a porous receptacle; how (and he now took them to watch the oper ation) this receptacle w as immersed in a w arm bouillon containing free-swimming spermatoz oa–at a minimum concentr ation of one hundred thousand per cubic centimetre, he insisted; and how , after ten minutes, the container w as lifted out of the liquor and its contents re-examined; how , if an y of the eggs remained unfertiliz ed, it  was again immersed, and, if necessary , yet again; how the fertiliz ed ova went back to the incubators; where the Alphas and Betas re-mained until definitely bottled; while the Gammas, Deltas and Epsilons  were brought out again, after only thirt y-six hours, to undergo Bo-kanovsky's Process."Bokano vsky's Process," repeated the Director , and the students un-derlined the words in their little notebooks.One egg, one embry o, one adult -normalit y. But a bokano vskified egg will bud, will prolifer ate, will divide. From eight to ninet y-six buds, and every bud will grow into a perfectly formed embry o, and ev ery embry o into a full-siz ed adult. Making ninet y-six human beings grow where only one grew before. Progress."Essentially ," the D .H.C. concluded, "bokano vskification consists of a series of arrests of dev elopment. W e check the normal growth and, paradoxically enough, the egg responds b y budding."Responds by budding. The pencils were busy .He pointed. On a v ery slowly mo ving band a r ack-full of test -tubes w as entering a large metal bo x, another , rack-full w as emerging. Machinery  faintly purred. It took eight minutes for the tubes to go through, he told them. Eight minutes of hard X -rays being about as much as an egg can stand. A few died; of the rest, the least susceptible divided into two; most put out four buds; some eight; all were returned to the incubators, where the buds began to dev elop; then, after two da ys, were suddenly chilled, chilled and check ed. Two, four, eight, the buds in their turn budded; and ha ving budded were dosed almost to death with alcohol; consequently burgeoned again and ha ving budded–bud out of bud out of bud– were thereafter –further arrest being gener ally fatal–left to dev elop in peace. By which time the original egg w as in a fair w ay to becoming an ything from eight to ninet y-six embry os– a prodigious impro vement, y ou will agree, on nature. Identical twins–but  not in piddling twos and threes as in the old viviparous da ys, when an egg would sometimes accidentally divide; actually b y doz ens, b y scores at a time."Scores," the Director repeated and flung out his arms, as though he were distributing largesse. "Scores."But one of the students w as fool enough to ask where the adv antage lay."My good bo y!" The Director wheeled sharply round on him. "Can't y ou see? Can't y ou see?" He r aised a hand; his expression w as solemn. "Bokano vsky's Process is one of the major instruments of social stabil-ity!"Major instruments of social stability.Standard men and women; in uniform batches. The whole of a small factory staffed with the products of a single bokano vskified egg."Ninet y-six identical twins working ninet y-six identical machines!" The voice w as almost tremulous with enthusiasm. "Y ou really know where you are. F or the first time in history ." He quoted the planetary motto . "Communit y, Identit y, Stabilit y." Grand words. "If we could bo-kanovskify indefinitely the whole problem would be solv ed."Solved by standard Gammas, un varying Deltas, uniform Epsilons. Mil-lions of identical twins. The principle of mass production at last applied  to biology ."But, alas," the Director shook his head, "we can't bokano vskify indefi-nitely ."Ninet y-six seemed to be the limit; sev enty-two a good a verage. From the same o vary and with gametes of the same male to manufacture as  many batches of identical twins as possible–that w as the best (sadly a second best) that they could do . And ev en that w as difficult."For in nature it tak es thirt y years for two hundred eggs to reach ma-turity. But our business is to stabiliz e the population at this moment, here and now . Dribbling out twins o ver a quarter of a century –what would be the use of that?"Obviously , no use at all. But P odsnap's T echnique had immensely ac-celerated the process of ripening. They could mak e sure of at least a hundred and fift y mature eggs within two y ears. F ertiliz e and bo-kanovskify–in other words, multiply b y sev enty-two– and y ou get an average of nearly elev en thousand brothers and sisters in a hundred and fift y batches of identical twins, all within two y ears of the same age."And in ex ceptional cases we can mak e one o vary yield us o ver fifteen thousand adult individuals."Beckoning to a fair -haired, ruddy y oung man who happened to be passing at the moment. "Mr . Foster," he called. The ruddy y oung man approached. "Can y ou tell us the record for a single o vary, Mr. Foster?""Sixteen thousand and twelv e in this Centre," Mr . Foster replied with-out hesitation. He spok e very quickly , had a viv acious blue ey e, and took an evident pleasure in quoting figures. "Sixteen thousand and twelv e; in one hundred and eight y-nine batches of identicals. But of course they'v e done much better ," he r attled on, "in some of the tropi-cal Centres. Singapore has often produced o ver sixteen thousand fiv e hundred; and Mombasa has actually touched the sev enteen thousand mark. But then they ha ve unfair adv antages. Y ou should see the w ay a negro o vary responds to pituitary! It's quite astonishing, when y ou're used to working with European material. Still," he added, with a laugh (but the light of combat w as in his ey es and the lift of his chin w as challenging), "still, we mean to beat them if we can. I'm working on a wonderful Delta-Minus o vary at this moment. Only just eighteen months old. Ov er twelv e thousand sev en hundred children already , ei-ther decanted or in embry o. And still going strong. W e'll beat them yet.""That's the spirit I lik e!" cried the Director , and clapped Mr . Foster on the shoulder . "Come along with us, and giv e these bo ys the benefit of your expert knowledge."Mr. Foster smiled modestly . "With pleasure." They went.In the Bottling R oom all w as harmonious bustle and ordered activit y. Flaps of fresh sow's peritoneum ready cut to the proper siz e came shooting up in little lifts from the Organ Store in the sub-basement. Whizz and then, click! the lift -hatches hew open; the bottle-liner had only to reach out a hand, tak e the flap , insert, smooth-down, and be-fore the lined bottle had had time to tr avel out of reach along the end-less band, whizz, click! another flap of peritoneum had shot up from the depths, ready to be slipped into y et another bottle, the next of that  slow interminable procession on the band.Next to the Liners stood the Matriculators. The procession adv anced; one b y one the eggs were tr ansferred from their test -tubes to the larger containers; deftly the peritoneal lining w as slit, the morula dropped into place, the saline solution poured in … and already the bottle had passed, and it w as the turn of the labellers. Heredit y, date of fertilization, membership of Bokano vsky Group–details were tr ans-ferred from test -tube to bottle. No longer anon ymous, but named, identified, the procession marched slowly on; on through an opening in  the w all, slowly on into the Social Predestination R oom."Eight y-eight cubic metres of card-index," said Mr . Foster with relish, as they entered."Containing all the relev ant information," added the Director ."Brought up to date ev ery morning.""And co-ordinated ev ery afternoon.""On the basis of which they mak e their calculations.""So man y individuals, of such and such qualit y," said Mr . Foster."Distributed in such and such quantities.""The optimum Decanting R ate at an y given moment.""Unforeseen w astages promptly made good.""Promptly ," repeated Mr . Foster. "If y ou knew the amount of o vertime I  had to put in after the last Japanese earthquak e!" He laughed good-humouredly and shook his head."The Predestinators send in their figures to the F ertiliz ers.""Who giv e them the embry os they ask for .""And the bottles come in here to be predestined in detail.""After which they are sent down to the Embry o Store.""Where we now proceed ourselv es."And opening a door Mr . Foster led the w ay down a staircase into the basement.The temper ature w as still tropical. They descended into a thick ening twilight. T wo doors and a passage with a double turn insured the cellar  against an y possible infiltr ation of the da y."Embry os are lik e photogr aph film," said Mr . Foster w aggishly , as he pushed open the second door . "They can only stand red light."And in effect the sultry darkness into which the students now followed him w as visible and crimson, lik e the darkness of closed ey es on a summer's afternoon. The bulging flanks of row on receding row and tier abo ve tier of bottles glinted with innumer able rubies, and among the rubies mo ved the dim red spectres of men and women with purple eyes and all the symptoms of lupus. The hum and r attle of machinery faintly stirred the air ."Give them a few figures, Mr . Foster," said the Director , who w as tired of talking.Mr. Foster w as only too happ y to giv e them a few figures.Two hundred and twent y metres long, two hundred wide, ten high. He pointed upw ards. Lik e chick ens drinking, the students lifted their ey es towards the distant ceiling.Three tiers of r acks: ground floor lev el, first gallery , second gallery .The spidery steel- work of gallery abo ve gallery faded a way in all direc-tions into the dark. Near them three red ghosts were busily unloading demijohns from a mo ving staircase.The escalator from the Social Predestination R oom.Each bottle could be placed on one of fifteen r acks, each r ack, though you couldn't see it, w as a con veyor traveling at the r ate of thirt y-three and a third centimetres an hour . Two hundred and sixt y-seven da ys at eight metres a da y. Two thousand one hundred and thirt y-six metres in  all. One circuit of the cellar at ground lev el, one on the first gallery , half on the second, and on the two hundred and sixt y-seventh morn-ing, da ylight in the Decanting R oom. Independent existence–so called."But in the interv al," Mr . Foster concluded, "we'v e managed to do a lot to them. Oh, a v ery great deal." His laugh w as knowing and trium-phant."That's the spirit I lik e," said the Director once more. "Let's w alk around. Y ou tell them ev erything, Mr . Foster."Mr. Foster duly told them.Told them of the growing embry o on its bed of peritoneum. Made them  taste the rich blood surrogate on which it fed. Explained wh y it had to be stimulated with placentin and th yroxin. T old them of the corpus lu-teum extract. Showed them the jets through which at ev ery twelfth metre from z ero to 2040 it w as automatically injected. Spok e of those gradually increasing doses of pituitary administered during the final ninety-six metres of their course. Described the artificial maternal cir-culation installed in ev ery bottle at Metre 112; showed them the reser-voir of blood-surrogate, the centrifugal pump that k ept the liquid mo v-ing over the placenta and dro ve it through the synthetic lung and waste product filter . Referred to the embry o's troublesome tendency to  anæmia, to the massiv e doses of hog's stomach extr act and foetal foal's liv er with which, in consequence, it had to be supplied.Showed them the simple mechanism b y means of which, during the last two metres out of ev ery eight, all the embry os were simultane-ously shak en into familiarit y with mo vement. Hinted at the gr avity of the so-called "tr auma of decanting," and enumer ated the precautions taken to minimiz e, by a suitable tr aining of the bottled embry o, that dangerous shock. T old them of the test for sex carried out in the neighborhood of Metre 200. Explained the system of labelling– a T for the males, a circle for the females and for those who were destined to become freemartins a question mark, black on a white ground."For of course," said Mr . Foster, "in the v ast majorit y of cases, fertilit y is merely a nuisance. One fertile o vary in twelv e hundred–that would really be quite sufficient for our purposes. But we w ant to ha ve a good choice. And of course one must alw ays ha ve an enormous margin of safety. So we allow as man y as thirt y per cent of the female embry os to dev elop normally . The others get a dose of male sex -hormone ev ery twent y-four metres for the rest of the course. R esult: they're decanted  as freemartins–structur ally quite normal (ex cept," he had to admit, "that they do ha ve the slightest tendency to grow beards), but sterile. Guaranteed sterile. Which brings us at last," continued Mr . Foster, "out of the realm of mere sla vish imitation of nature into the much more in-teresting world of human in vention."He rubbed his hands. F or of course, they didn't content themselv es with merely hatching out embry os: an y cow could do that."We also predestine and condition. W e decant our babies as socializ ed human beings, as Alphas or Epsilons, as future sew age work ers or fu-ture …" He w as going to sa y "future W orld controllers," but correcting himself , said "future Directors of Hatcheries," instead.The D .H.C. acknowledged the compliment with a smile.They were passing Metre 320 on R ack 11. A y oung Beta-Minus me-chanic w as busy with screw -driver and spanner on the blood-surrogate  pump of a passing bottle. The hum of the electric motor deepened b y fractions of a tone as he turned the nuts. Down, down … A final twist, a glance at the rev olution counter , and he w as done. He mo ved two paces down the line and began the same process on the next pump ."Reducing the number of rev olutions per minute," Mr . Foster explained.  "The surrogate goes round slower; therefore passes through the lung at longer interv als; therefore giv es the embry o less o xygen. Nothing like oxygen-shortage for k eeping an embry o below par ." Again he rubbed his hands."But wh y do y ou want to k eep the embry o below par?" ask ed an in-genuous student."Ass!" said the Director , breaking a long silence. "Hasn't it occurred to you that an Epsilon embry o must ha ve an Epsilon en vironment as well as an Epsilon heredit y?"It evidently hadn't occurred to him. He w as covered with confusion."The lower the caste," said Mr . Foster, "the shorter the o xygen." The first organ affected w as the br ain. After that the sk eleton. A t seventy per cent of normal o xygen y ou got dw arfs. A t less than sev enty eye-less monsters."Who are no use at all," concluded Mr . Foster.Whereas (his v oice became confidential and eager), if they could dis-cover a technique for shortening the period of matur ation what a tri-umph, what a benefaction to Societ y!"Consider the horse."They considered it.Mature at six; the elephant at ten. While at thirteen a man is not y et sexually mature; and is only full-grown at twent y. Hence, of course, that fruit of dela yed dev elopment, the human intelligence."But in Epsilons," said Mr . Foster v ery justly , "we don't need human in-telligence."Didn't need and didn't get it. But though the Epsilon mind w as mature at ten, the Epsilon body w as not fit to work till eighteen. Long y ears of superfluous and w asted immaturit y. If the ph ysical dev elopment could be speeded up till it w as as quick, sa y, as a cow's, what an enormous saving to the Communit y!"Enormous!" murmured the students. Mr . Foster's enthusiasm w as in-fectious.He became r ather technical; spok e of the abnormal endocrine co-ordination which made men grow so slowly; postulated a germinal mu-tation to account for it. Could the effects of this germinal mutation be undone? Could the individual Epsilon embry o be made a rev ert, b y a suitable technique, to the normalit y of dogs and cows? That w as the problem. And it w as all but solv ed.Pilkington, at Mombasa, had produced individuals who were sexually mature at four and full-grown at six and a half . A scientific triumph. But socially useless. Six -year-old men and women were too stupid to do ev en Epsilon work. And the process w as an all-or -nothing one; ei-ther y ou failed to modif y at all, or else y ou modified the whole w ay. They were still trying to find the ideal compromise between adults of twent y and adults of six. So far without success. Mr . Foster sighed and shook his head.Their w anderings through the crimson twilight had brought them to the neighborhood of Metre 170 on R ack 9. From this point on wards Rack 9 w as enclosed and the bottle performed the remainder of their journey in a kind of tunnel, interrupted here and there b y openings two or three metres wide."Heat conditioning," said Mr . Foster.Hot tunnels alternated with cool tunnels. Coolness w as wedded to dis-comfort in the form of hard X -rays. By the time they were decanted the embry os had a horror of cold. They were predestined to emigr ate to the tropics, to be miner and acetate silk spinners and steel work ers. Later on their minds would be made to endorse the judgment of their bodies. "W e condition them to thriv e on heat," concluded Mr . Foster. "Our colleagues upstairs will teach them to lo ve it.""And that," put in the Director sententiously , "that is the secret of hap-piness and virtue–liking what y ou've got to do . All conditioning aims at  that: making people lik e their unescapable social destin y."In a gap between two tunnels, a nurse w as delicately probing with a long fine syringe into the gelatinous contents of a passing bottle. The students and their guides stood w atching her for a few moments in si-lence."Well, Lenina," said Mr . Foster, when at last she withdrew the syringe and str aightened herself up .The girl turned with a start. One could see that, for all the lupus and the purple ey es, she w as uncommonly prett y."Henry!" Her smile flashed redly at him– a row of cor al teeth."Charming, charming," murmured the Director and, giving her two or three little pats, receiv ed in ex change a r ather deferential smile for himself ."What are y ou giving them?" ask ed Mr . Foster, making his tone v ery professional."Oh, the usual t yphoid and sleeping sickness.""Tropical work ers start being inoculated at Metre 150," Mr . Foster ex-plained to the students. "The embry os still ha ve gills. W e immuniz e the fish against the future man's diseases." Then, turning back to Lenina, "Ten to fiv e on the roof this afternoon," he said, "as usual.""Charming," said the Director once more, and, with a final pat, mo ved away after the others.On Rack 10 rows of next gener ation's chemical work ers were being trained in the toler ation of lead, caustic soda, tar , chlorine. The first of a batch of two hundred and fift y embry onic rock et-plane engineers w as just passing the elev en hundred metre mark on R ack 3. A special mechanism k ept their containers in constant rotation. "T o impro ve their sense of balance," Mr . Foster explained. "Doing repairs on the outside of a rock et in mid- air is a ticklish job . We slack en off the circu-lation when they're right w ay up, so that they're half starv ed, and double the flow of surrogate when they're upside down. They learn to associate topsy -turvy dom with well-being; in fact, they're only truly happy when they're standing on their heads."And now ," Mr. Foster went on, "I'd lik e to show y ou some v ery inter-esting conditioning for Alpha Plus Intellectuals. W e have a big batch of them on R ack 5. First Gallery lev el," he called to two bo ys who had started to go down to the ground floor ."They're round about Metre 900," he explained. "Y ou can't really do any useful intellectual conditioning till the foetuses ha ve lost their tails.  Follow me."But the Director had look ed at his w atch. "T en to three," he said. "No time for the intellectual embry os, I'm afr aid. W e must go up to the Nurseries before the children ha ve finished their afternoon sleep ."Mr. Foster w as disappointed. "A t least one glance at the Decanting Room," he pleaded."Very well then." The Director smiled indulgently . "Just one glance."Chapter TwoMR. FOSTER w as left in the Decanting R oom. The D .H.C. and his stu-dents stepped into the nearest lift and were carried up to the fifth floor.INFANT NURSERIES . NEO-P AVLOVIAN CONDITIONING ROOMS , an-nounced the notice board.The Director opened a door . They were in a large bare room, v ery bright and sunn y; for the whole of the southern w all was a single win-dow. Half a doz en nurses, trousered and jack eted in the regulation white viscose-linen uniform, their hair aseptically hidden under white caps, were engaged in setting out bowls of roses in a long row across the floor . Big bowls, pack ed tight with blossom. Thousands of petals, ripe-blown and silkily smooth, lik e the cheeks of innumer able little cherubs, but of cherubs, in that bright light, not ex clusiv ely pink and Aryan, but also luminously Chinese, also Mexican, also apoplectic with too much blowing of celestial trumpets, also pale as death, pale with the posthumous whiteness of marble.The nurses stiffened to attention as the D .H.C. came in."Set out the books," he said curtly .In silence the nurses obey ed his command. Between the rose bowls the books were duly set out –a row of nursery quartos opened in vit-ingly each at some gaily coloured image of beast or fish or bird."Now bring in the children."They hurried out of the room and returned in a minute or two , each pushing a kind of tall dumb- waiter laden, on all its four wire-netted shelves, with eight -month-old babies, all exactly alik e (a Bokano vsky Group , it was evident) and all (since their caste w as Delta) dressed in khaki."Put them down on the floor ."The infants were unloaded."Now turn them so that they can see the flowers and books."Turned, the babies at once fell silent, then began to cr awl tow ards those clusters of sleek colours, those shapes so ga y and brilliant on the white pages. As they approached, the sun came out of a momen-tary eclipse behind a cloud. The roses flamed up as though with a sud-den passion from within; a new and profound significance seemed to suffuse the shining pages of the books. From the r anks of the cr awling babies came little squeals of ex citement, gurgles and twitterings of pleasure.The Director rubbed his hands. "Ex cellent!" he said. "It might almost have been done on purpose."The swiftest cr awlers were already at their goal. Small hands reached out uncertainly , touched, gr asped, unpetaling the tr ansfigured roses, crumpling the illuminated pages of the books. The Director w aited until  all were happily busy . Then, "W atch carefully ," he said. And, lifting his hand, he ga ve the signal.The Head Nurse, who w as standing b y a switchboard at the other end of the room, pressed down a little lev er.There w as a violent explosion. Shriller and ev er shriller , a siren shriek ed. Alarm bells maddeningly sounded.The children started, screamed; their faces were distorted with terror ."And now ," the Director shouted (for the noise w as deafening), "now we proceed to rub in the lesson with a mild electric shock."He waved his hand again, and the Head Nurse pressed a second lev er. The screaming of the babies suddenly changed its tone. There w as something desper ate, almost insane, about the sharp spasmodic y elps to which they now ga ve utter ance. Their little bodies twitched and stiffened; their limbs mo ved jerkily as if to the tug of unseen wires."We can electrif y that whole strip of floor ," bawled the Director in ex-planation. "But that's enough," he signalled to the nurse.The explosions ceased, the bells stopped ringing, the shriek of the si-ren died down from tone to tone into silence. The stiffly twitching bod-ies relax ed, and what had become the sob and y elp of infant maniacs broadened out once more into a normal howl of ordinary terror ."Offer them the flowers and the books again."The nurses obey ed; but at the approach of the roses, at the mere sight  of those gaily -coloured images of pussy and cock -a-doodle-doo and baa-baa black sheep , the infants shr ank a way in horror , the v olume of their howling suddenly increased."Observ e," said the Director triumphantly , "observ e."Books and loud noises, flowers and electric shocks– already in the in-fant mind these couples were compromisingly link ed; and after two hundred repetitions of the same or a similar lesson would be wedded indissolubly . What man has joined, nature is powerless to put asunder ."They'll grow up with what the psy chologists used to call an 'instinc-tive' hatred of books and flowers. R eflexes unalter ably conditioned. They'll be safe from books and botan y all their liv es." The Director turned to his nurses. "T ake them a way again."Still y elling, the khaki babies were loaded on to their dumb- waiters and wheeled out, lea ving behind them the smell of sour milk and a most welcome silence.One of the students held up his hand; and though he could see quite well wh y you couldn't ha ve lower -cast people w asting the Communit y's time o ver books, and that there w as alw ays the risk of their reading something which might undesir ably decondition one of their reflex es, yet … well, he couldn't understand about the flowers. Wh y go to the trouble of making it psy chologically impossible for Deltas to lik e flow-ers?Patiently the D .H.C. explained. If the children were made to scream at the sight of a rose, that w as on grounds of high economic policy . Not so very long ago (a century or thereabouts), Gammas, Deltas, ev en Epsilons, had been conditioned to lik e flowers–flowers in particular and  wild nature in gener al. The idea w as to mak e them w ant to be going out into the country at ev ery available opportunit y, and so compel them to consume tr ansport."And didn't they consume tr ansport?" ask ed the student."Quite a lot," the D .H.C. replied. "But nothing else."Primroses and landscapes, he pointed out, ha ve one gr ave defect: they  are gr atuitous. A lo ve of nature k eeps no factories busy . It w as decided  to abolish the lo ve of nature, at an y rate among the lower classes; to abolish the lo ve of nature, but not the tendency to consume tr ansport. For of course it w as essential that they should k eep on going to the country , even though they hated it. The problem w as to find an eco-nomically sounder reason for consuming tr ansport than a mere affec-tion for primroses and landscapes. It w as duly found."We condition the masses to hate the country ," concluded the Director . "But simultaneously we condition them to lo ve all country sports. A t the same time, we see to it that all country sports shall entail the use of elabor ate appar atus. So that they consume manufactured articles as  well as tr ansport. Hence those electric shocks.""I see," said the student, and w as silent, lost in admir ation.There w as a silence; then, clearing his throat, "Once upon a time," the  Director began, "while our F ord w as still on earth, there w as a little boy called R euben R abino vitch. R euben w as the child of P olish-speaking parents."The Director interrupted himself . "You know what P olish is, I suppose?""A dead language.""Like French and German," added another student, officiously showing off his learning."And 'parent'?" questioned the D .H.C.There w as an uneasy silence. Sev eral of the bo ys blushed. They had not yet learned to dr aw the significant but often v ery fine distinction between smut and pure science. One, at last, had the cour age to r aise a hand."Human beings used to be …" he hesitated; the blood rushed to his cheeks. "W ell, they used to be viviparous.""Quite right." The Director nodded appro vingly ."And when the babies were decanted …""'Born,'" came the correction."Well, then they were the parents– I mean, not the babies, of course; the other ones." The poor bo y was overwhelmed with confusion."In brief ," the Director summed up , "the parents were the father and the mother ." The smut that w as really science fell with a cr ash into the  boys' ey e-avoiding silence. "Mother ," he repeated loudly rubbing in the  science; and, leaning back in his chair , "These," he said gr avely, "are unpleasant facts; I know it. But then most historical facts are unpleas-ant."He returned to Little R euben–to Little R euben, in whose room, one evening, b y an o versight, his father and mother (cr ash, cr ash!) hap-pened to lea ve the r adio turned on.("For you must remember that in those da ys of gross viviparous re-production, children were alw ays brought up b y their parents and not in State Conditioning Centres.")While the child w as asleep , a broadcast progr amme from London sud-denly started to come through; and the next morning, to the aston-ishment of his cr ash and cr ash (the more daring of the bo ys ventured to grin at one another), Little R euben wok e up repeating word for word  a long lecture b y that curious old writer ("one of the v ery few whose works ha ve been permitted to come down to us"), George Bernard Shaw, who w as speaking, according to a well- authenticated tr adition, about his own genius. T o Little R euben's wink and snigger , this lecture was, of course, perfectly incomprehensible and, imagining that their child had suddenly gone mad, they sent for a doctor . He, fortunately , understood English, recogniz ed the discourse as that which Sha w had broadcasted the previous ev ening, realiz ed the significance of what had happened, and sent a letter to the medical press about it."The principle of sleep-teaching, or h ypnopædia, had been disco v-ered." The D .H.C. made an impressiv e pause.The principle had been disco vered; but man y, man y years were to elapse before that principle w as usefully applied."The case of Little R euben occurred only twent y-three y ears after Our Ford's first T -Model w as put on the mark et." (Here the Director made a  sign of the T on his stomach and all the students rev erently followed suit.) "And y et …"Furiously the students scribbled. "Hypnopædia, first used officially in A.F. 214. Why not before? Two reasons. (a) …""These early experimenters," the D .H.C. w as saying, "were on the wrong tr ack. They thought that h ypnopædia could be made an instru-ment of intellectual education …"(A small bo y asleep on his right side, the right arm stuck out, the right  hand hanging limp o ver the edge of the bed. Through a round gr ating in the side of a bo x a voice speaks softly ."The Nile is the longest riv er in Africa and the second in length of all the riv ers of the globe. Although falling short of the length of the Mississippi-Missouri, the Nile is at the head of all riv ers as regards the length of its basin, which extends through 35 degrees of latitude …"At breakfast the next morning, "T ommy," some one sa ys, "do y ou know which is the longest riv er in Africa?" A shaking of the head. "But don't y ou remember something that begins: The Nile is the …""The - Nile - is - the - longest - riv er - in - Africa - and - the - second -  in - length - of - all - the - riv ers - of - the - globe …" The words come rushing out. "Although - falling - short - of …""Well now , which is the longest riv er in Africa?"The ey es are blank. "I don't know .""But the Nile, T ommy.""The - Nile - is - the - longest - riv er - in - Africa - and - second …""Then which riv er is the longest, T ommy?"Tommy burst into tears. "I don't know ," he howls.)That howl, the Director made it plain, discour aged the earliest in vesti-gators. The experiments were abandoned. No further attempt w as made to teach children the length of the Nile in their sleep . Quite rightly . You can't learn a science unless y ou know what it's all about."Whereas, if they'd only started on moral education," said the Director , leading the w ay tow ards the door . The students followed him, desper-ately scribbling as they w alked and all the w ay up in the lift. "Mor al education, which ought nev er, in an y circumstances, to be r ational.""Silence, silence," whispered a loud speak er as they stepped out at the  fourteenth floor , and "Silence, silence," the trumpet mouths indefati-gably repeated at interv als down ev ery corridor . The students and even the Director himself rose automatically to the tips of their toes. They were Alphas, of course, but ev en Alphas ha ve been well condi-tioned. "Silence, silence." All the air of the fourteenth floor w as sibilant  with the categorical imper ative.Fifty yards of tiptoeing brought them to a door which the Director cau-tiously opened. They stepped o ver the threshold into the twilight of a shuttered dormitory . Eight y cots stood in a row against the w all. There was a sound of light regular breathing and a continuous murmur , as of very faint v oices remotely whispering.A nurse rose as they entered and came to attention before the Direc-tor."What's the lesson this afternoon?" he ask ed."We had Elementary Sex for the first fort y minutes," she answered. "But now it's switched o ver to Elementary Class Consciousness."The Director w alked slowly down the long line of cots. R osy and re-laxed with sleep , eight y little bo ys and girls la y softly breathing. There was a whisper under ev ery pillow . The D .H.C. halted and, bending o ver one of the little beds, listened attentiv ely."Elementary Class Consciousness, did y ou sa y? Let's ha ve it repeated a little louder b y the trumpet."At the end of the room a loud speak er projected from the w all. The Di-rector w alked up to it and pressed a switch."… all wear green," said a soft but v ery distinct v oice, beginning in the middle of a sentence, "and Delta Children wear khaki. Oh no , I don't want to pla y with Delta children. And Epsilons are still worse. They're too stupid to be able to read or write. Besides they wear black, which is such a beastly colour . I'm so glad I'm a Beta."There w as a pause; then the v oice began again."Alpha children wear grey They work much harder than we do , be-cause they're so frightfully clev er. I'm really a wfuly glad I'm a Beta, because I don't work so hard. And then we are much better than the Gammas and Deltas. Gammas are stupid. They all wear green, and Delta children wear khaki. Oh no , I don't want to pla y with Delta chil-dren. And Epsilons are still worse. They're too stupid to be able …"The Director pushed back the switch. The v oice w as silent. Only its thin ghost continued to mutter from beneath the eight y pillows."They'll ha ve that repeated fort y or fift y times more before they w ake; then again on Thursda y, and again on Saturda y. A hundred and twent y times three times a week for thirt y months. After which they go on to a more adv anced lesson."Roses and electric shocks, the khaki of Deltas and a whiff of asafœti-da–wedded indissolubly before the child can speak. But wordless con-ditioning is crude and wholesale; cannot bring home the finer distinc-tions, cannot inculcate the more complex courses of beha viour. For that there must be words, but words without reason. In brief , hyp-nopædia."The greatest mor alizing and socializing force of all time."The students took it down in their little books. Str aight from the horse's mouth.Once more the Director touched the switch."… so frightfully clev er," the soft, insinuating, indefatigable v oice w as saying, "I'm really a wfully glad I'm a Beta, because …"Not so much lik e drops of w ater, though w ater, it is true, can wear holes in the hardest gr anite; r ather, drops of liquid sealing- wax, drops that adhere, incrust, incorpor ate themselv es with what they fall on, till finally the rock is all one scarlet blob ."Till at last the child's mind is these suggestions, and the sum of the suggestions is the child's mind. And not the child's mind only . The adult's mind too– all his life long. The mind that judges and desires and  decides–made up of these suggestions. But all these suggestions are our suggestions!" The Director almost shouted in his triumph. "Sug-gestions from the State." He banged the nearest table. "It therefore follows …"A noise made him turn round."Oh, F ord!" he said in another tone, "I'v e gone and wok en the chil-dren."Chapter ThreeOUTSIDE, in the garden, it w as pla ytime. Nak ed in the w arm June sunshine, six or sev en hundred little bo ys and girls were running with shrill y ells over the la wns, or pla ying ball games, or squatting silently in twos and threes among the flowering shrubs. The roses were in bloom, two nightingales soliloquiz ed in the boskage, a cuck oo was just going out of tune among the lime trees. The air w as drowsy with the murmur of bees and helicopters.The Director and his students stood for a short time w atching a game of Centrifugal Bumble-pupp y. Twenty children were grouped in a circle round a chrome steel tower . A ball thrown up so as to land on the plat-form at the top of the tower rolled down into the interior , fell on a r ap-idly rev olving disk, w as hurled through one or other of the numerous apertures pierced in the cylindrical casing, and had to be caught."Strange," mused the Director , as they turned a way, "strange to think that ev en in Our F ord's da y most games were pla yed without more ap-paratus than a ball or two and a few sticks and perhaps a bit of net-ting. imagine the folly of allowing people to pla y elabor ate games which do nothing whatev er to increase consumption. It's madness. Nowadays the Controllers won't appro ve of an y new game unless it can be shown that it requires at least as much appar atus as the most complicated of existing games." He interrupted himself ."That's a charming little group ," he said, pointing.In a little gr assy ba y between tall clumps of Mediterr anean heather , two children, a little bo y of about sev en and a little girl who might have been a y ear older , were pla ying, v ery gr avely and with all the fo-cussed attention of scientists intent on a labour of disco very, a rudi-mentary sexual game."Charming, charming!" the D .H.C. repeated sentimentally ."Charming," the bo ys politely agreed. But their smile w as rather pa-tronizing. They had put aside similar childish amusements too recently  to be able to w atch them now without a touch of contempt. Charming?  but it w as just a pair of kids fooling about; that w as all. Just kids."I alw ays think," the Director w as continuing in the same r ather maud-lin tone, when he w as interrupted b y a loud boo-hooing.From a neighbouring shrubbery emerged a nurse, leading b y the hand a small bo y, who howled as he went. An anxious-looking little girl trot-ted at her heels."What's the matter?" ask ed the Director .The nurse shrugged her shoulders. "Nothing much," she answered. "It's just that this little bo y seems r ather reluctant to join in the ordi-nary erotic pla y. I'd noticed it once or twice before. And now again to-day. He started y elling just now …""Honestly ," put in the anxious-looking little girl, "I didn't mean to hurt him or an ything. Honestly .""Of course y ou didn't, dear ," said the nurse reassuringly . "And so ," she went on, turning back to the Director , "I'm taking him in to see the As-sistant Superintendent of Psy chology . Just to see if an ything's at all abnormal.""Quite right," said the Director . "Take him in. Y ou sta y here, little girl," he added, as the nurse mo ved away with her still howling charge. "What's y our name?""Polly Trotsky .""And a v ery good name too ," said the Director . "Run away now and see  if you can find some other little bo y to pla y with."The child scampered off into the bushes and w as lost to sight."Exquisite little creature!" said the Director , looking after her . Then, turning to his students, "What I'm going to tell y ou now ," he said, "may sound incredible. But then, when y ou're not accustomed to his-tory, most facts about the past do sound incredible."He let out the amazing truth. F or a v ery long period before the time of Our F ord, and ev en for some gener ations afterw ards, erotic pla y be-tween children had been regarded as abnormal (there w as a roar of laughter); and not only abnormal, actually immor al (no!): and had therefore been rigorously suppressed.A look of astonished incredulit y appeared on the faces of his listeners. Poor little kids not allowed to amuse themselv es? They could not be-lieve it."Even adolescents," the D .H.C. w as saying, "ev en adolescents lik e yourselv es …""Not possible!""Barring a little surreptitious auto-erotism and homosexualit y–abso-lutely nothing.""Nothing?""In most cases, till they were o ver twent y years old.""Twenty years old?" echoed the students in a chorus of loud disbelief ."Twenty," the Director repeated. "I told y ou that y ou'd find it incredi-ble.""But what happened?" they ask ed. "What were the results?""The results were terrible." A deep resonant v oice brok e startlingly into  the dialogue.They look ed around. On the fringe of the little group stood a str anger –a man of middle height, black -haired, with a hook ed nose, full red lips,  eyes very piercing and dark. "T errible," he repeated.The D .H.C. had at that moment sat down on one of the steel and rub-ber benches con veniently scattered through the gardens; but at the sight of the str anger , he spr ang to his feet and darted forw ard, his hand outstretched, smiling with all his teeth, effusiv e."Controller! What an unexpected pleasure! Bo ys, what are y ou thinking  of? This is the Controller; this is his fordship , Mustapha Mond."In the four thousand rooms of the Centre the four thousand electric clocks simultaneously struck four . Discarnate v oices called from the trumpet mouths."Main Da y-shift off dut y. Second Da y-shift tak e over. Main Da y-shift off  …"In the lift, on their w ay up to the changing rooms, Henry F oster and the Assistant Director of Predestination r ather pointedly turned their backs on Bernard Marx from the Psy chology Bureau: a verted them-selves from that unsa voury reputation.The faint hum and r attle of machinery still stirred the crimson air in the Embry o Store. Shifts might come and go , one lupus-coloured face give place to another; majestically and for ev er the con veyors crept forward with their load of future men and women.Lenina Crowne w alked briskly tow ards the door .His fordship Mustapha Mond! The ey es of the saluting students almost popped out of their heads. Mustapha Mond! The R esident Controller for  Western Europe! One of the T en World Controllers. One of the T en … and he sat down on the bench with the D .H.C., he w as going to sta y, to sta y, yes, and actually talk to them … str aight from the horse's mouth. Str aight from the mouth of F ord himself .Two shrimp-brown children emerged from a neighbouring shrubbery , stared at them for a moment with large, astonished ey es, then re-turned to their amusements among the lea ves."You all remember ," said the Controller , in his strong deep v oice, "y ou all remember , I suppose, that beautiful and inspired sa ying of Our Ford's: History is bunk. History ," he repeated slowly , "is bunk."He waved his hand; and it w as as though, with an in visible feather wisk, he had brushed a way a little dust, and the dust w as Har appa, was Ur of the Chaldees; some spider -webs, and they were Thebes and Babylon and Cnossos and My cenae. Whisk. Whisk –and where w as Odysseus, where w as Job , where were Jupiter and Gotama and Jesus? Whisk –and those specks of antique dirt called A thens and R ome, Jeru-salem and the Middle Kingdom– all were gone. Whisk –the place where Italy had been w as empt y. Whisk, the cathedr als; whisk, whisk, King Lear and the Thoughts of P ascal. Whisk, P assion; whisk, R equiem; whisk, S ymphon y; whisk …"Going to the F eelies this ev ening, Henry?" enquired the Assistant Pre-destinator . "I hear the new one at the Alhambr a is first -rate. There's a love scene on a bearskin rug; they sa y it's marv ellous. Ev ery hair of the bear reproduced. The most amazing tactual effects.""That's wh y you're taught no history ," the Controller w as saying. "But now the time has come …"The D .H.C. look ed at him nerv ously. There were those str ange rumours  of old forbidden books hidden in a safe in the Controller's study . Bibles,  poetry –Ford knew what.Mustapha Mond intercepted his anxious glance and the corners of his red lips twitched ironically ."It's all right, Director ," he said in a tone of faint derision, "I won't cor-rupt them."The D .H.C. w as overwhelmed with confusion.Those who feel themselv es despised do well to look despising. The smile on Bernard Marx's face w as contemptuous. Ev ery hair on the bear indeed!"I shall mak e a point of going," said Henry F oster.Mustapha Mond leaned forw ard, shook a finger at them. "Just try to realiz e it," he said, and his v oice sent a str ange thrill quiv ering along their diaphr agms. "T ry to realiz e what it w as like to ha ve a viviparous mother ."That smutt y word again. But none of them dreamed, this time, of smil-ing."Try to imagine what 'living with one's family' meant."They tried; but obviously without the smallest success."And do y ou know what a 'home' w as?"They shook their heads.From her dim crimson cellar Lenina Crowne shot up sev enteen stories, turned to the right as she stepped out of the lift, w alked down a long corridor and, opening the door mark ed GIRLS' DRES SING-ROOM, plunged into a deafening chaos of arms and bosoms and undercloth-ing. T orrents of hot w ater were splashing into or gurgling out of a hun-dred baths. R umbling and hissing, eight y vibro- vacuum massage ma-chines were simultaneously kneading and sucking the firm and sun-burnt flesh of eight y superb female specimens. Ev ery one w as talking at the top of her v oice. A S ynthetic Music machine w as warbling out a super -cornet solo ."Hullo , Fanny," said Lenina to the y oung woman who had the pegs and  locker next to hers.Fanny work ed in the Bottling R oom, and her surname w as also Crowne. But as the two thousand million inhabitants of the plant had only ten thousand names between them, the coincidence w as not par-ticularly surprising.Lenina pulled at her zippers-down wards on the jack et, down wards with  a double-handed gesture at the two that held trousers, down wards again to loosen her undergarment. Still wearing her shoes and stock-ings, she w alked off tow ards the bathrooms.Home, home– a few small rooms, stiflingly o ver-inhabited b y a man, b y a periodically teeming woman, b y a rabble of bo ys and girls of all ages.  No air , no space; an understeriliz ed prison; darkness, disease, and smells.(The Controller's ev ocation w as so vivid that one of the bo ys, more sensitiv e than the rest, turned pale at the mere description and w as on  the point of being sick.)Lenina got out of the bath, toweled herself dry , took hold of a long flexible tube plugged into the w all, presented the nozzle to her breast, as though she meant to commit suicide, pressed down the trigger . A blast of w armed air dusted her with the finest talcum powder . Eight different scents and eau-de-Cologne were laid on in little taps o ver the  wash-basin. She turned on the third from the left, dabbed herself with chypre and, carrying her shoes and stockings in her hand, went out to see if one of the vibro- vacuum machines were free.And home w as as squalid psy chically as ph ysically . Psychically , it was a rabbit hole, a midden, hot with the frictions of tightly pack ed life, reek-ing with emotion. What suffocating intimacies, what dangerous, in-sane, obscene relationships between the members of the family group!  Maniacally , the mother brooded o ver her children (her children) … brooded o ver them lik e a cat o ver its kittens; but a cat that could talk, a cat that could sa y, "My bab y, my bab y," over and o ver again. "My baby, and oh, oh, at m y breast, the little hands, the hunger , and that unspeakable agonizing pleasure! Till at last m y bab y sleeps, m y bab y sleeps with a bubble of white milk at the corner of his mouth. My little baby sleeps …""Yes," said Mustapha Mond, nodding his head, "y ou ma y well shudder .""Who are y ou going out with to-night?" Lenina ask ed, returning from the vibro- vac like a pearl illuminated from within, pinkly glowing."Nobody ."Lenina r aised her ey ebrows in astonishment."I've been feeling r ather out of sorts lately ," Fanny explained. "Dr . Wells advised me to ha ve a Pregnancy Substitute.""But, m y dear , you're only nineteen. The first Pregnancy Substitute isn't compulsory till twent y-one.""I know , dear . But some people are better if they begin earlier . Dr. Wells told me that brunettes with wide pelvises, lik e me, ought to ha ve their first Pregnancy Substitute at sev enteen. So I'm really two y ears late, not two y ears early ." She opened the door of her lock er and pointed to the row of bo xes and labelled phials on the upper shelf ."SYRUP OF CORPUS LUTEUM," Lenina read the names aloud. "OV ARIN, GUARANTEED FRESH: NO T TO BE USED AF TER A UGUST 1ST , A.F. 632. MAMMAR Y GLAND EXTRACT : TO BE T AKEN THREE TIMES DAIL Y, BE-FORE MEALS , WITH A LIT TLE W ATER. PLACENTIN: 5cc T O BE IN-JECTED INTRA VENALL Y EVER Y THIRD DA Y … Ugh!" Lenina shuddered. "How I loathe intr avenals, don't y ou?""Yes. But when they do one good …" F anny was a particularly sensible girl.Our F ord–or Our Freud, as, for some inscrutable reason, he chose to call himself whenev er he spok e of psy chological matters–Our Freud had been the first to rev eal the appalling dangers of family life. The world w as full of fathers– was therefore full of misery; full of moth-ers–therefore of ev ery kind of perv ersion from sadism to chastit y; full of brothers, sisters, uncles, aunts–full of madness and suicide."And y et, among the sa vages of Samoa, in certain islands off the coast  of New Guinea …"The tropical sunshine la y like warm honey on the nak ed bodies of chil-dren tumbling promiscuously among the hibiscus blossoms. Home w as in any one of twent y palm-thatched houses. In the T robriands concep-tion w as the work of ancestr al ghosts; nobody had ev er heard of a fa-ther."Extremes," said the Controller , "meet. F or the good reason that they were made to meet.""Dr. Wells sa ys that a three months' Pregnancy Substitute now will make all the difference to m y health for the next three or four y ears.""Well, I hope he's right," said Lenina. "But, F anny, do y ou really mean to say that for the next three months y ou're not supposed to …""Oh no , dear . Only for a week or two , that's all. I shall spend the ev e-ning at the Club pla ying Musical Bridge. I suppose y ou're going out?"Lenina nodded."Who with?""Henry F oster.""Again?" F anny's kind, r ather moon-lik e face took on an incongruous expression of pained and disappro ving astonishment. "Do y ou mean to  tell me y ou're still going out with Henry F oster?"Mothers and fathers, brothers and sisters. But there were also hus-bands, wiv es, lo vers. There were also monogam y and romance."Though y ou probably don't know what those are," said Mustapha Mond.They shook their heads.Family, monogam y, romance. Ev erywhere ex clusiv eness, a narrow channelling of impulse and energy ."But ev ery one belongs to ev ery one else," he concluded, citing the hypnopædic pro verb.The students nodded, emphatically agreeing with a statement which upwards of sixt y-two thousand repetitions in the dark had made them accept, not merely as true, but as axiomatic, self -evident, utterly in-disputable."But after all," Lenina w as protesting, "it's only about four months now  since I'v e been ha ving Henry .""Only four months! I lik e that. And what's more," F anny went on, pointing an accusing finger , "there's been nobody else ex cept Henry all  that time. Has there?"Lenina blushed scarlet; but her ey es, the tone of her v oice remained defiant. "No , there hasn't been an y one else," she answered almost truculently . "And I jolly well don't see wh y there should ha ve been.""Oh, she jolly well doesn't see wh y there should ha ve been," F anny re-peated, as though to an in visible listener behind Lenina's left shoulder . Then, with a sudden change of tone, "But seriously ," she said, "I really  do think y ou ought to be careful. It's such horribly bad form to go on and on lik e this with one man. A t forty, or thirt y-five, it wouldn't be so bad. But at your age, Lenina! No , it really won't do . And y ou know how  strongly the D .H.C. objects to an ything intense or long-dr awn. F our months of Henry F oster, without ha ving another man– why, he'd be fu-rious if he knew …""Think of w ater under pressure in a pipe." They thought of it. "I pierce it once," said the Controller . "What a jet!"He pierced it twent y times. There were twent y piddling little fountains."My bab y. My bab y …!""Mother!" The madness is infectious."My lo ve, my one and only , precious, precious …"Mother , monogam y, romance. High spurts the fountain; fierce and foamy the wild jet. The urge has but a single outlet. My lo ve, my bab y. No wonder these poor pre-moderns were mad and wick ed and miser-able. Their world didn't allow them to tak e things easily , didn't allow them to be sane, virtuous, happ y. What with mothers and lo vers, what  with the prohibitions they were not conditioned to obey , what with the temptations and the lonely remorses, what with all the diseases and the endless isolating pain, what with the uncertainties and the po ver-ty–they were forced to feel strongly . And feeling strongly (and strongly , what w as more, in solitude, in hopelessly individual isolation),  how could they be stable?"Of course there's no need to giv e him up . Have somebody else from time to time, that's all. He has other girls, doesn't he?"Lenina admitted it."Of course he does. T rust Henry F oster to be the perfect gentle-man– always correct. And then there's the Director to think of . You know what a stickler …"Nodding, "He patted me on the behind this afternoon," said Lenina."There, y ou see!" F anny was triumphant. "That shows what he stands for. The strictest con ventionalit y.""Stabilit y," said the Controller , "stabilit y. No civilization without social stabilit y. No social stabilit y without individual stabilit y." His v oice w as a trumpet. Listening they felt larger , warmer .The machine turns, turns and must k eep on turning–for ev er. It is death if it stands still. A thousand millions scr abbled the crust of the earth. The wheels began to turn. In a hundred and fift y years there were two thousand millions. Stop all the wheels. In a hundred and fift y weeks there are once more only a thousand millions; a thousand thou-sand thousand men and women ha ve starv ed to death.Wheels must turn steadily , but cannot turn untended. There must be men to tend them, men as steady as the wheels upon their axles, sane  men, obedient men, stable in contentment.Crying: My bab y, my mother , my only , only lo ve groaning: My sin, m y terrible God; screaming with pain, muttering with fev er, bemoaning old  age and po verty–how can they tend the wheels? And if they cannot tend the wheels … The corpses of a thousand thousand thousand men and women would be hard to bury or burn."And after all," F anny's tone w as coaxing, "it's not as though there were an ything painful or disagreeable about ha ving one or two men besides Henry . And seeing that y ou ought to be a little more promiscu-ous …""Stabilit y," insisted the Controller , "stabilit y. The primal and the ulti-mate need. Stabilit y. Hence all this."With a w ave of his hand he indicated the gardens, the huge building of  the Conditioning Centre, the nak ed children furtiv e in the undergrowth or running across the la wns.Lenina shook her head. "Somehow ," she mused, "I hadn't been feeling  very keen on promiscuit y lately . There are times when one doesn't. Haven't y ou found that too , Fanny?"Fanny nodded her sympath y and understanding. "But one's got to make the effort," she said, sententiously , "one's got to pla y the game. After all, ev ery one belongs to ev ery one else.""Yes, ev ery one belongs to ev ery one else," Lenina repeated slowly and, sighing, w as silent for a moment; then, taking F anny's hand, gave it a little squeez e. "You're quite right, F anny. As usual. I'll mak e the effort."Impulse arrested spills o ver, and the flood is feeling, the flood is pas-sion, the flood is ev en madness: it depends on the force of the current, the height and strength of the barrier . The uncheck ed stream flows smoothly down its appointed channels into a calm well-being. (The embry o is hungry; da y in, da y out, the blood-surrogate pump unceas-ingly turns its eight hundred rev olutions a minute. The decanted infant  howls; at once a nurse appears with a bottle of external secretion. Feeling lurks in that interv al of time between desire and its consum-mation. Shorten that interv al, break down all those old unnecessary barriers."Fortunate bo ys!" said the Controller . "No pains ha ve been spared to make your liv es emotionally easy –to preserv e you, so far as that is possible, from ha ving emotions at all.""Ford's in his flivv er," murmured the D .H.C. "All's well with the world.""Lenina Crowne?" said Henry F oster, echoing the Assistant Predestina-tor's question as he zipped up his trousers. "Oh, she's a splendid girl. Wonderfully pneumatic. I'm surprised y ou ha ven't had her .""I can't think how it is I ha ven't," said the Assistant Predestinator . "I certainly will. A t the first opportunit y."From his place on the opposite side of the changing-room aisle, Ber-nard Marx o verheard what they were sa ying and turned pale."And to tell the truth," said Lenina, "I'm beginning to get just a tin y bit bored with nothing but Henry ev ery da y." She pulled on her left stock-ing. "Do y ou know Bernard Marx?" she ask ed in a tone whose ex ces-sive casualness w as evidently forced.Fanny look ed startled. "Y ou don't mean to sa y …?""Why not? Bernard's an Alpha Plus. Besides, he ask ed me to go to one of the Sa vage R eserv ations with him. I'v e always wanted to see a Sa v-age R eserv ation.""But his reputation?""What do I care about his reputation?""They sa y he doesn't lik e Obstacle Golf .""They sa y, they sa y," mock ed Lenina."And then he spends most of his time b y himself –alone." There w as horror in F anny's voice."Well, he won't be alone when he's with me. And an yhow, why are people so beastly to him? I think he's r ather sweet." She smiled to herself; how absurdly sh y he had been! Frightened almost –as though she were a W orld Controller and he a Gamma-Minus machine minder ."Consider y our own liv es," said Mustapha Mond. "Has an y of y ou ev er encountered an insurmountable obstacle?"The question w as answered b y a negativ e silence."Has an y of y ou been compelled to liv e through a long time-interv al between the consciousness of a desire and its fufilment?""Well," began one of the bo ys, and hesitated."Speak up ," said the D .H.C. "Don't k eep his fordship w aiting.""I once had to w ait nearly four weeks before a girl I w anted would let me ha ve her.""And y ou felt a strong emotion in consequence?""Horrible!""Horrible; precisely ," said the Controller . "Our ancestors were so stupid and short -sighted that when the first reformers came along and of-fered to deliv er them from those horrible emotions, they wouldn't ha ve anything to do with them.""Talking about her as though she were a bit of meat." Bernard ground his teeth. "Ha ve her here, ha ve her there." Lik e mutton. Degr ading her  to so much mutton. She said she'd think it o ver, she said she'd giv e me an answer this week. Oh, F ord, F ord, F ord." He would ha ve liked to go up to them and hit them in the face–hard, again and again."Yes, I really do advise y ou to try her ," Henry F oster w as saying."Take Ectogenesis. Pfitzner and K awaguchi had got the whole tech-nique work ed out. But would the Go vernments look at it? No . There was something called Christianit y. Women were forced to go on being viviparous.""He's so ugly!" said F anny."But I r ather lik e his looks.""And then so small." Fanny made a grimace; smallness w as so horribly  and typically low -caste."I think that's r ather sweet," said Lenina. "One feels one would lik e to pet him. Y ou know . Like a cat."Fanny was shock ed. "They sa y somebody made a mistak e when he was still in the bottle–thought he w as a Gamma and put alcohol into his blood-surrogate. That's wh y he's so stunted.""What nonsense!" Lenina w as indignant."Sleep teaching w as actually prohibited in England. There w as some-thing called liber alism. P arliament, if y ou know what that w as, passed a law against it. The records surviv e. Speeches about libert y of the subject. Libert y to be inefficient and miser able. Freedom to be a round  peg in a square hole.""But, m y dear chap , you're welcome, I assure y ou. You're welcome." Henry F oster patted the Assistant Predestinator on the shoulder . "Every one belongs to ev ery one else, after all."One hundred repetitions three nights a week for four y ears, thought Bernard Marx, who w as a specialist on h ypnopædia. Sixt y-two thou-sand four hundred repetitions mak e one truth. Idiots!"Or the Caste S ystem. Constantly proposed, constantly rejected. There  was something called democr acy. As though men were more than physico-chemically equal.""Well, all I can sa y is that I'm going to accept his in vitation."Bernard hated them, hated them. But they were two , they were large, they were strong."The Nine Y ears' W ar began in A.F . 141.""Not ev en if it were true about the alcohol in his blood-surrogate.""Phosgene, chloropicrin, eth yl iodoacetate, diphen ylcyanarsine, tri-chlormeth yl, chloroformate, dichloreth yl sulphide. Not to mention h y-drocy anic acid.""Which I simply don't believ e," Lenina concluded."The noise of fourteen thousand aeroplanes adv ancing in open order . But in the K urfurstendamm and the Eighth Arrondissement, the explo-sion of the anthr ax bombs is hardly louder than the popping of a paper  bag.""Because I do want to see a Sa vage R eserv ation."Ch3C6H2(NO2)3+Hg(CNO)2=well, what? An enormous hole in the ground, a pile of masonry , some bits of flesh and mucus, a foot, with the boot still on it, flying through the air and landing, flop , in the mid-dle of the ger aniums–the scarlet ones; such a splendid show that summer!"You're hopeless, Lenina, I giv e you up .""The R ussian technique for infecting w ater supplies w as particularly in-genious."Back turned to back, F anny and Lenina continued their changing in si-lence."The Nine Y ears' W ar, the great Economic Collapse. There w as a choice  between W orld Control and destruction. Between stabilit y and …""Fanny Crowne's a nice girl too ," said the Assistant Predestinator .In the nurseries, the Elementary Class Consciousness lesson w as over, the voices were adapting future demand to future industrial supply . "I do love flying," they whispered, "I do lo ve flying, I do lo ve having new clothes, I do lo ve …""Liber alism, of course, w as dead of anthr ax, but all the same y ou couldn't do things b y force.""Not nearly so pneumatic as Lenina. Oh, not nearly .""But old clothes are beastly ," continued the untiring whisper . "We al-ways throw a way old clothes. Ending is better than mending, ending is  better than mending, ending is better …""Government's an affair of sitting, not hitting. Y ou rule with the br ains and the buttocks, nev er with the fists. F or example, there w as the conscription of consumption.""There, I'm ready ," said Lenina, but F anny remained speechless and averted. "Let's mak e peace, F anny darling.""Every man, woman and child compelled to consume so much a y ear. In the interests of industry . The sole result …""Ending is better than mending. The more stitches, the less riches; the  more stitches …""One of these da ys," said F anny, with dismal emphasis, "y ou'll get into trouble.""Conscientious objection on an enormous scale. An ything not to con-sume. Back to nature.""I do lo ve flying. I do lo ve flying.""Back to culture. Y es, actually to culture. Y ou can't consume much if you sit still and read books.""Do I look all right?" Lenina ask ed. Her jack et was made of bottle green acetate cloth with green viscose fur; at the cuffs and collar ."Eight hundred Simple Lifers were mowed down b y machine guns at Golders Green.""Ending is better than mending, ending is better than mending."Green corduro y shorts and white viscose- woollen stockings turned down below the knee."Then came the famous British Museum Massacre. T wo thousand cul-ture fans gassed with dichloreth yl sulphide."A green- and-white jock ey cap shaded Lenina's ey es; her shoes were bright green and highly polished."In the end," said Mustapha Mond, "the Controllers realiz ed that force was no good. The slower but infinitely surer methods of ectogenesis, neo-P avlovian conditioning and h ypnopædia …"And round her w aist she wore a silv er-mounted green morocco-surrogate cartridge belt, bulging (for Lenina w as not a freemartin) with  the regulation supply of contr aceptiv es."The disco veries of Pfitzner and K awaguchi were at last made use of . An intensiv e propaganda against viviparous reproduction …""Perfect!" cried F anny enthusiastically . She could nev er resist Lenina's charm for long. "And what a perfectly sweet Malthusian belt!""Accompanied b y a campaign against the P ast; b y the closing of mu-seums, the blowing up of historical monuments (luckily most of them had already been destro yed during the Nine Y ears' W ar); b y the sup-pression of all books published before A.F . 15O .''"I simply must get one lik e it," said F anny."There were some things called the p yramids, for example."My old black -patent bandolier …""And a man called Shak espeare. Y ou've nev er heard of them of course.""It's an absolute disgr ace–that bandolier of mine.""Such are the adv antages of a really scientific education.""The more stitches the less riches; the more stitches the less …""The introduction of Our F ord's first T -Model …""I've had it nearly three months.""Chosen as the opening date of the new er a.""Ending is better than mending; ending is better …""There w as a thing, as I'v e said before, called Christianit y.""Ending is better than mending.""The ethics and philosoph y of under -consumption …""I love new clothes, I lo ve new clothes, I lo ve …""So essential when there w as under -production; but in an age of ma-chines and the fixation of nitrogen–positiv ely a crime against societ y.""Henry F oster ga ve it me.""All crosses had their tops cut and became T's. There w as also a thing called God.""It's real morocco-surrogate.""We have the W orld State now . And F ord's Da y celebr ations, and Communit y Sings, and Solidarit y Services.""Ford, how I hate them!" Bernard Marx w as thinking."There w as a thing called Hea ven; but all the same they used to drink enormous quantities of alcohol.""Like meat, lik e so much meat.""There w as a thing called the soul and a thing called immortalit y.""Do ask Henry where he got it.""But they used to tak e morphia and cocaine.""And what mak es it worse, she thinks of herself as meat.""Two thousand pharmacologists and bio-chemists were subsidiz ed in A.P. 178.""He does look glum," said the Assistant Predestinator , pointing at Ber-nard Marx."Six y ears later it w as being produced commercially . The perfect drug.""Let's bait him.""Euphoric, narcotic, pleasantly hallucinant.""Glum, Marx, glum." The clap on the shoulder made him start, look up . It was that brute Henry F oster. "What y ou need is a gr amme of soma.""All the adv antages of Christianit y and alcohol; none of their defects.""Ford, I should lik e to kill him!" But all he did w as to sa y, "No, thank you," and fend off the proffered tube of tablets."Take a holida y from realit y whenev er you lik e, and come back without  so much as a headache or a m ythology .""Take it," insisted Henry F oster, "tak e it.""Stabilit y was practically assured.""One cubic centimetre cures ten gloom y sentiments," said the Assis-tant Predestinator citing a piece of homely h ypnopædic wisdom."It only remained to conquer old age.""Damn y ou, damn y ou!" shouted Bernard Marx."Hoity-toity.""Gonadal hormones, tr ansfusion of y oung blood, magnesium salts …""And do remember that a gr amme is better than a damn." They went out, laughing."All the ph ysiological stigmata of old age ha ve been abolished. And along with them, of course …""Don't forget to ask him about that Malthusian belt," said F anny."Along with them all the old man's mental peculiarities. Char acters remain constant throughout a whole lifetime.""… two rounds of Obstacle Golf to get through before dark. I must fly .""Work, pla y–at sixt y our powers and tastes are what they were at sev-enteen. Old men in the bad old da ys used to renounce, retire, tak e to religion, spend their time reading, thinking–thinking!""Idiots, swine!" Bernard Marx w as saying to himself , as he w alked down the corridor to the lift."Now–such is progress–the old men work, the old men copulate, the old men ha ve no time, no leisure from pleasure, not a moment to sit down and think –or if ev er by some unlucky chance such a crevice of time should y awn in the solid substance of their distr actions, there is always soma, delicious soma, half a gr amme for a half -holida y, a gramme for a week -end, two gr ammes for a trip to the gorgeous East, three for a dark eternit y on the moon; returning whence they find themselv es on the other side of the crevice, safe on the solid ground of  daily labour and distr action, scampering from feely to feely , from girl to pneumatic girl, from Electromagnetic Golf course to …""Go a way, little girl," shouted the D .H.C. angrily . "Go a way, little bo y! Can't y ou see that his fordship's busy? Go and do y our erotic pla y somewhere else.""Suffer little children," said the Controller .Slowly , majestically , with a faint humming of machinery , the Con veyors moved forw ard, thirt y-three centimters an hour . In the red darkness glinted innumer able rubies.Chapter FourTHE LIF T was crowded with men from the Alpha Changing R ooms, and Lenina's entry w ars greeted b y man y friendly nods and smiles. She was a popular girl and, at one time or another , had spent a night with almost all of them.They were dear bo ys, she thought, as she returned their salutations. Charming bo ys! Still, she did wish that George Edz el's ears weren't quite so big (perhaps he'd been giv en just a spot too much par athyroid at Metre 328?). And looking at Benito Hoo ver, she couldn't help re-membering that he w as really too hairy when he took his clothes off .Turning, with ey es a little saddened b y the recollection, of Benito's curly blackness, she sa w in a corner the small thin body , the melan-choly face of Bernard Marx."Bernard!" she stepped up to him. "I w as looking for y ou." Her v oice rang clear abo ve the hum of the mounting lift. The others look ed round curiously . "I w anted to talk to y ou about our New Mexico plan." Out of the tail of her ey e she could see Benito Hoo ver gaping with as-tonishment. The gape anno yed her . "Surprised I shouldn't be begging to go with him again!" she said to herself . Then aloud, and more warmly than ev er, "I'd simply love to come with y ou for a week in July," she went on. (An yhow, she w as publicly pro ving her unfaithful-ness to Henry . Fanny ought to be pleased, ev en though it w as Ber-nard.) "That is," Lenina ga ve him her most deliciously significant smile,  "if you still w ant to ha ve me."Bernard's pale face flushed. "What on earth for?" she wondered, as-tonished, but at the same time touched b y this str ange tribute to her power ."Hadn't we better talk about it somewhere else?" he stammered, look-ing horribly uncomfortable."As though I'd been sa ying something shocking," thought Lenina. "He couldn't look more upset if I'd made a dirt y joke–asked him who his mother w as, or something lik e that.""I mean, with all these people about …" He w as chok ed with confusion.Lenina's laugh w as frank and wholly unmalicious. "How funn y you are!" she said; and she quite genuinely did think him funn y. "You'll give me at least a week's w arning, won't y ou," she went on in another tone. "I suppose we tak e the Blue P acific R ocket? Does it start from the Charing- T Tower? Or is it from Hampstead?"Before Bernard could answer , the lift came to a standstill."Roof!" called a creaking v oice.The liftman w as a small simian creature, dressed in the black tunic of an Epsilon-Minus Semi-Moron."Roof!"He flung open the gates. The w arm glory of afternoon sunlight made him start and blink his ey es. "Oh, roof!" he repeated in a v oice of r ap-ture. He w as as though suddenly and jo yfully a wakened from a dark annihilating stupor . "Roof!"He smiled up with a kind of doggily expectant ador ation into the faces of his passengers. T alking and laughing together , they stepped out into  the light. The liftman look ed after them."Roof?" he said once more, questioningly .Then a bell r ang, and from the ceiling of the lift a loud speak er began, very softly and y et very imperiously , to issue its commands."Go down," it said, "go down. Floor Eighteen. Go down, go down. Floor  Eighteen. Go down, go …"The liftman slammed the gates, touched a button and instantly dropped back into the droning twilight of the well, the twilight of his own habitual stupor .It was warm and bright on the roof . The summer afternoon w as drowsy with the hum of passing helicopters; and the deeper drone of the rock et-planes hastening, in visible, through the bright sky fiv e or six miles o verhead w as like a caress on the soft air . Bernard Marx drew  a deep breath. He look ed up into the sky and round the blue horiz on and finally down into Lenina's face."Isn't it beautiful!" His v oice trembled a little.She smiled at him with an expression of the most sympathetic under-standing. "Simply perfect for Obstacle Golf ," she answered r apturously . "And now I must fly , Bernard. Henry gets cross if I k eep him w aiting. Let me know in good time about the date." And w aving her hand she ran away across the wide flat roof tow ards the hangars. Bernard stood watching the retreating twinkle of the white stockings, the sunburnt knees viv aciously bending and unbending again, again, and the softer rolling of those well-fitted corduro y shorts beneath the bottle green jacket. His face wore an expression of pain."I should sa y she w as prett y," said a loud and cheery v oice just behind  him.Bernard started and look ed around. The chubb y red face of Benito Hoover was beaming down at him–beaming with manifest cordialit y. Benito w as notoriously good-natured. P eople said of him that he could have got through life without ev er touching soma. The malice and bad tempers from which other people had to tak e holida ys nev er afflicted him. R eality for Benito w as alw ays sunn y."Pneumatic too . And how!" Then, in another tone: "But, I sa y," he went on, "y ou do look glum! What y ou need is a gr amme of soma." Diving into his right -hand trouser -pock et, Benito produced a phial. "One cubic centimetre cures ten gloom y … But, I sa y!"Bernard had suddenly turned and rushed a way.Benito stared after him. "What can be the matter with the fellow?" he wondered, and, shaking his head, decided that the story about the al-cohol ha ving been put into the poor chap's blood-surrogate must be true. "T ouched his br ain, I suppose."He put a way the soma bottle, and taking out a pack et of sex -hormone chewing-gum, stuffed a plug into his cheek and w alked slowly a way towards the hangars, ruminating.Henry F oster had had his machine wheeled out of its lock -up and, when Lenina arriv ed, w as already seated in the cockpit, w aiting."Four minutes late," w as all his comment, as she climbed in beside him. He started the engines and threw the helicopter screws into gear . The machine shot v ertically into the air . Henry acceler ated; the hum-ming of the propeller shrilled from hornet to w asp, from w asp to mos-quito; the speedometer showed that they were rising at the best part of two kilometres a minute. London diminished beneath them. The huge table-topped buildings were no more, in a few seconds, than a bed of geometrical mushrooms sprouting from the green of park and garden. In the midst of them, thin-stalk ed, a taller , slenderer fungus, the Charing- T Tower lifted tow ards the sky a disk of shining concrete.Like the v ague torsos of fabulous athletes, huge flesh y clouds lolled on  the blue air abo ve their heads. Out of one of them suddenly dropped a  small scarlet insect, buzzing as it fell."There's the R ed Rocket," said Henry , "just come in from New Y ork." Looking at his w atch. "Sev en minutes behind time," he added, and shook his head. "These A tlantic services–they're really scandalously unpunctual."He took his foot off the acceler ator. The humming of the screws o ver-head dropped an octa ve and a half , back through w asp and hornet to bumble bee, to cockchafer , to stag-beetle. The upw ard rush of the ma-chine slack ened off; a moment later they were hanging motionless in the air . Henry pushed at a lev er; there w as a click. Slowly at first, then  faster and faster , till it w as a circular mist before their ey es, the pro-peller in front of them began to rev olve. The wind of a horiz ontal speed whistled ev er more shrilly in the sta ys. Henry k ept his ey e on the rev olution-counter; when the needle touched the twelv e hundred mark, he threw the helicopter screws out of gear . The machine had enough forw ard momentum to be able to fly on its planes.Lenina look ed down through the window in the floor between her feet. They were flying o ver the six kilometre z one of park -land that sepa-rated Centr al London from its first ring of satellite suburbs. The green was maggot y with fore-shortened life. F orests of Centrifugal Bumble-puppy towers gleamed between the trees. Near Shepherd's Bush two thousand Beta-Minus mix ed doubles were pla ying Riemann-surface tennis. A double row of Escalator Fiv es Courts lined the main road from Notting Hill to Willesden. In the Ealing stadium a Delta gymnastic  displa y and communit y sing w as in progress."What a hideous colour khaki is," remark ed Lenina, v oicing the h yp-nopædic prejudices of her caste.The buildings of the Hounslow F eely Studio co vered sev en and a half hectares. Near them a black and khaki arm y of labourers w as busy re-vitrifying the surface of the Great W est Road. One of the huge tr avel-ling crucibles w as being tapped as they flew o ver. The molten stone poured out in a stream of dazzling incandescence across the road, the asbestos rollers came and went; at the tail of an insulated w atering cart the steam rose in white clouds.At Brentford the T elevision Corpor ation's factory w as like a small town."They must be changing the shift," said Lenina.Like aphides and ants, the leaf -green Gamma girls, the black Semi-Morons sw armed round the entr ances, or stood in queues to tak e their  places in the monor ail tram-cars. Mulberry -coloured Beta-Minuses came and went among the crowd. The roof of the main building w as alive with the alighting and departure of helicopters."My word," said Lenina, "I'm glad I'm not a Gamma."Ten minutes later they were at Stok e Poges and had started their first round of Obstacle Golf .§ 2WITH ey es for the most part downcast and, if ev er they lighted on a fellow creature, at once and furtiv ely averted, Bernard hastened across  the roof . He w as like a man pursued, but pursued b y enemies he does not wish to see, lest they should seem more hostile ev en than he had supposed, and he himself be made to feel guiltier and ev en more help-lessly alone."That horrible Benito Hoo ver!" And y et the man had meant well enough. Which only made it, in a w ay, much worse. Those who meant well beha ved in the same w ay as those who meant badly . Even Lenina was making him suffer . He remembered those weeks of timid indeci-sion, during which he had look ed and longed and despaired of ev er having the cour age to ask her . Dared he face the risk of being humili-ated b y a contemptuous refusal? But if she were to sa y yes, what r ap-ture! W ell, now she had said it and he w as still wretched– wretched that she should ha ve thought it such a perfect afternoon for Obstacle Golf, that she should ha ve trotted a way to join Henry F oster, that she should ha ve found him funn y for not w anting to talk of their most pri-vate affairs in public. W retched, in a word, because she had beha ved as an y health y and virtuous English girl ought to beha ve and not in some other , abnormal, extr aordinary w ay.He opened the door of his lock -up and called to a lounging couple of Delta-Minus attendants to come and push his machine out on to the roof. The hangars were staffed b y a single Bokano vsky Group , and the men were twins, identically small, black and hideous. Bernard ga ve his orders in the sharp , rather arrogant and ev en offensiv e tone of one who does not feel himself too secure in his superiorit y. To have deal-ings with members of the lower castes w as alw ays, for Bernard, a most distressing experience. F or whatev er the cause (and the current gossip about the alcohol in his blood-surrogate ma y very lik ely–for ac-cidents will happen–ha ve been true) Bernard's ph ysique as hardly bet-ter than that of the a verage Gamma. He stood eight centimetres short of the standard Alpha height and w as slender in proportion. Contact with members of he lower castes alw ays reminded him painfully of this  physical inadequacy . "I am I, and wish I w asn't"; his self -consciousness w as acute and stressing. Each time he found himself looking on the lev el, instead of down ward, into a Delta's face, he felt humiliated. W ould the creature treat him with the respect due to his caste? The question haunted him. Not without reason. F or Gammas, Deltas and Epsilons had been to some extent conditioned to associate corporeal mass with social superiorit y. Indeed, a faint h ypnopædic prejudice in fa vour of siz e was univ ersal. Hence the laughter of the women to whom he made proposals, the pr actical joking of his equals among the men. The mock ery made him feel an outsider; and feeling an outsider he beha ved lik e one, which increased the prejudice against  him and intensified the contempt and hostilit y aroused b y his ph ysical defects. Which in turn increased his sense of being alien and alone. A chronic fear of being slighted made him a void his equals, made him stand, where his inferiors were concerned, self -consciously on his dig-nity. How bitterly he en vied men lik e Henry F oster and Benito Hoo ver! Men who nev er had to shout at an Epsilon to get an order obey ed; men who took their position for gr anted; men who mo ved through the caste system as a fish through w ater–so utterly at home as to be un-aware either of themselv es or of the beneficent and comfortable ele-ment in which they had their being.Slackly , it seemed to him, and with reluctance, the twin attendants wheeled his plane out on the roof ."Hurry up!" said Bernard irritably . One of them glanced at him. W as that a kind of bestial derision that he detected in those blank grey eyes? "Hurry up!" he shouted more loudly , and there w as an ugly r asp in his v oice.He climbed into the plane and, a minute later , was flying south wards, towards the riv er.The v arious Bureaux of Propaganda and the College of Emotional Engi-neering were housed in a single sixt y-story building in Fleet Street. In the basement and on the low floors were the presses and offices of the  three great London newspapers–The Hourly Radio, an upper -caste sheet, the pale green Gamma Gazette, and, on khaki paper and in words ex clusiv ely of one syllable, The Delta Mirror. Then came the Bu-reaux of Propaganda b y Television, b y Feeling Picture, and b y Syn-thetic V oice and Music respectiv ely–twent y-two floors of them. Abo ve were the search labor atories and the padded rooms in which Sound-Track W riters and S ynthetic Composers did the delicate work. The top eighteen floors were occupied the College of Emotional Engineering.Bernard landed on the roof of Propaganda House and stepped out."Ring down to Mr . Helmholtz W atson," he ordered the Gamma-Plus porter , "and tell him that Mr . Bernard Marx is w aiting for him on the roof."He sat down and lit a cigarette.Helmholtz W atson w as writing when the message came down."Tell him I'm coming at once," he said and hung up the receiv er. Then, turning to his secretary , "I'll lea ve you to put m y things a way," he went  on in the same official and impersonal tone; and, ignoring her lustrous smile, got up and w alked briskly to the door .He was a powerfully built man, deep-chested, broad-shouldered, mas-sive, and y et quick in his mo vements, springy and agile. The round strong pillar of his neck supported a beautifully shaped head. His hair was dark and curly , his features strongly mark ed. In a forcible em-phatic w ay, he w as handsome and look ed, as his secretary w as nev er tired of repeating, ev ery centimetre an Alpha Plus. By profession he was a lecturer at the College of Emotional Engineering (Department of Writing) and the interv als of his educational activities, a working Emo-tional Engineer . He wrote regularly for The Hourly Radio, composed feely scenarios, and had the happiest knack for slogans and h yp-nopædic rh ymes."Able," w as the v erdict of his superiors. "P erhaps, (and they would shake their heads, would significantly lower their v oices) "a little too able."Yes, a little too able; they were right. A mental ex cess had produced in  Helmholtz W atson effects v ery similar to those which, in Bernard Marx,  were the result of a ph ysical defect. T oo little bone and br awn had iso-lated Bernard from his fellow men, and the sense of this apartness, being, b y all the current standards, a mental ex cess, became in its turn a cause of wider separ ation. That which had made Helmholtz so uncomfortably a ware of being himself and all alone w as too much abil-ity. What the two men shared w as the knowledge that they were indi-viduals. But whereas the ph ysically defectiv e Bernard had suffered all his life from the consciousness of being separ ate, it w as only quite re-cently that, grown a ware of his mental ex cess, Helmholtz W atson had also become a ware of his difference from the people who surrounded him. This Escalator -Squash champion, this indefatigable lo ver (it w as said that he had had six hundred and fort y different girls in under four years), this admir able committee man and best mix er had realiz ed quite suddenly that sport, women, communal activities were only , so far as he w as concerned, second bests. R eally, and at the bottom, he was interested in something else. But in what? In what? That w as the problem which Bernard had come to discuss with him–or r ather, since it was alw ays Helmholtz who did all the talking, to listen to his friend discussing, y et once more.Three charming girls from the Bureau of Propaganda b y Synthetic Voice w aylaid him as he stepped out of the lift."Oh, Helmholtz, darling, do come and ha ve a picnic supper with us on Exmoor ." They clung round him imploringly .He shook his head, he pushed his w ay through them. "No , no.""We're not in viting an y other man."But Helmholtz remained unshak en ev en by this delightful promise. "No," he repeated, "I'm busy ." And he held resolutely on his course. The girls tr ailed after him. It w as not till he had actually climbed into Bernard's plane and slammed the door that they ga ve up pursuit. Not without reproaches."These women!" he said, as the machine rose into the air . "These women!" And he shook his head, he frowned. "T oo awful," Bernard hypocritically agreed, wishing, as he spok e the words, that he could have as man y girls as Helmholtz did, and with as little trouble. He w as seized with a sudden urgent need to boast. "I'm taking Lenina Crowne to New Mexico with me," he said in a tone as casual as he could mak e it."Are y ou?" said Helmholtz, with a total absence of interest. Then after a little pause, "This last week or two ," he went on, "I'v e been cutting all my committees and all m y girls. Y ou can't imagine what a hullaba-loo they'v e been making about it at the College. Still, it's been worth it, I think. The effects …" He hesitated. "W ell, they're odd, they're v ery odd."A physical shortcoming could produce a kind of mental ex cess. The process, it seemed, w as rev ersible. Mental ex cess could produce, for its own purposes, the v oluntary blindness and deafness of deliber ate solitude, the artificial impotence of asceticism.The rest of the short flight w as accomplished in silence. When they had arriv ed and were comfortably stretched out on the pneumatic so-fas in Bernard's room, Helmholtz began again.Speaking v ery slowly , "Did y ou ev er feel," he ask ed, "as though y ou had something inside y ou that w as only w aiting for y ou to giv e it a chance to come out? Some sort of extr a power that y ou aren't us-ing–you know , like all the w ater that goes down the falls instead of through the turbines?" He look ed at Bernard questioningly ."You mean all the emotions one might be feeling if things were differ-ent?"Helmholtz shook his head. "Not quite. I'm thinking of a queer feeling I sometimes get, a feeling that I'v e got something important to sa y and the power to sa y it–only I don't know what it is, and I can't mak e any use of the power . If there w as some different w ay of writing … Or else something else to write about …" He w as silent; then, "Y ou see," he went on at last, "I'm prett y good at in venting phr ases– you know , the sort of words that suddenly mak e you jump , almost as though y ou'd sat on a pin, they seem so new and ex citing ev en though they're about  something h ypnopædically obvious. But that doesn't seem enough. It's  not enough for the phr ases to be good; what y ou mak e with them ought to be good too .""But y our things are good, Helmholtz.""Oh, as far as they go ." Helmholtz shrugged his shoulders. "But they go such a little w ay. They aren't important enough, somehow . I feel I could do something much more important. Y es, and more intense, more violent. But what? What is there more important to sa y? And how can one be violent about the sort of things one's expected to write  about? W ords can be lik e X-rays, if y ou use them properly –they'll go through an ything. Y ou read and y ou're pierced. That's one of the things I try to teach m y students–how to write piercingly . But what on earth's the good of being pierced b y an article about a Communit y Sing, or the latest impro vement in scent organs? Besides, can y ou make words really piercing– you know , like the v ery hardest X -rays–when y ou're writing about that sort of thing? Can y ou sa y some-thing about nothing? That's what it finally boils down to . I try and I try  …""Hush!" said Bernard suddenly , and lifted a w arning finger; they lis-tened. "I believ e there's somebody at the door ," he whispered.Helmholtz got up , tiptoed across the room, and with a sharp quick movement flung the door wide open. There w as, of course, nobody there."I'm sorry ," said Bernard, feeling and looking uncomfortably foolish. "I suppose I'v e got things on m y nerv es a bit. When people are suspi-cious with y ou, you start being suspicious with them."He passed his hand across his ey es, he sighed, his v oice became plain-tive. He w as justif ying himself . "If y ou knew what I'd had to put up with recently ," he said almost tearfully –and the uprush of his self -pity was like a fountain suddenly released. "If y ou only knew!"Helmholtz W atson listened with a certain sense of discomfort. "P oor lit-tle Bernard!" he said to himself . But at the same time he felt r ather ashamed for his friend. He wished Bernard would show a little more pride.Chapter FiveBY EIGHT O'CL OCK the light w as failing. The loud speak er in the tower  of the Stok e Poges Club House began, in a more than human tenor , to announce the closing of the courses. Lenina and Henry abandoned their game and w alked back tow ards the Club . From the grounds of the Internal and External Secretion T rust came the lowing of those thousands of cattle which pro vided, with their hormones and their milk, the r aw materials for the great factory at F arnham R oyal.An incessant buzzing of helicopters filled the twilight. Ev ery two and a half minutes a bell and the screech of whistles announced the depar-ture of one of the light monor ail trains which carried the lower caste golfers back from their separ ate course to the metropolis.Lenina and Henry climbed into their machine and started off . At eight hundred feet Henry slowed down the helicopter screws, and they hung  for a minute or two poised abo ve the fading landscape. The forest of Burnham Beeches stretched lik e a great pool of darkness tow ards the bright shore of the western sky . Crimson at the horiz on, the last of the  sunset faded, through or ange, upw ards into y ellow and a pale w atery green. North wards, bey ond and abo ve the trees, the Internal and Ex-ternal Secretions factory glared with a fierce electric brilliance from every window of its twent y stories. Beneath them la y the buildings of the Golf Club–the huge Lower Caste barr acks and, on the other side of a dividing w all, the smaller houses reserv ed for Alpha and Beta mem-bers. The approaches to the monor ail station were black with the ant -like pullulation of lower -caste activit y. From under the glass v ault a lighted tr ain shot out into the open. F ollowing its southeasterly course across the dark plain their ey es were dr awn to the majestic buildings of the Slough Crematorium. F or the safet y of night -flying planes, its four tall chimneys were flood-lighted and tipped with crimson danger signals. It w as a landmark."Why do the smok e-stacks ha ve those things lik e balconies around them?" enquired Lenina."Phosphorus reco very," explained Henry telegr aphically . "On their w ay up the chimney the gases go through four separ ate treatments. P2O5 used to go right out of circulation ev ery time they cremated some one.  Now they reco ver over ninet y-eight per cent of it. More than a kilo and  a half per adult corpse. Which mak es the best part of four hundred tons of phosphorus ev ery year from England alone." Henry spok e with a happ y pride, rejoicing whole-heartedly in the achiev ement, as though it had been his own. "Fine to think we can go on being socially useful ev en after we're dead. Making plants grow ."Lenina, mean while, had turned her ey es away and w as looking per-pendicularly down wards at the monor ail station. "Fine," she agreed. "But queer that Alphas and Betas won't mak e any more plants grow than those nast y little Gammas and Deltas and Epsilons down there.""All men are ph ysico-chemically equal," said Henry sententiously . "Be-sides, ev en Epsilons perform indispensable services.""Even an Epsilon …" Lenina suddenly remembered an occasion when, as a little girl at school, she had wok en up in the middle of the night and become a ware, for the first time, of the whispering that had haunted all her sleeps. She sa w again the beam of moonlight, the row of small white beds; heard once more the soft, soft v oice that said (the  words were there, unforgotten, unforgettable after so man y night -long repetitions): "Ev ery one works for ev ery one else. W e can't do without any one. Ev en Epsilons are useful. W e couldn't do without Epsilons. Every one works for ev ery one else. W e can't do without an y one …" Lenina remembered her first shock of fear and surprise; her specula-tions through half a w akeful hour; and then, under the influence of those endless repetitions, the gr adual soothing of her mind, the sooth-ing, the smoothing, the stealth y creeping of sleep . …"I suppose Epsilons don't really mind being Epsilons," she said aloud."Of course they don't. How can they? They don't know what it's lik e being an ything else. W e'd mind, of course. But then we'v e been differ-ently conditioned. Besides, we start with a different heredit y.""I'm glad I'm not an Epsilon," said Lenina, with con viction."And if y ou were an Epsilon," said Henry , "your conditioning would have made y ou no less thankful that y ou weren't a Beta or an Alpha." He put his forw ard propeller into gear and headed the machine to-wards London. Behind them, in the west, the crimson and or ange were  almost faded; a dark bank of cloud had crept into the z enith. As they flew o ver the crematorium, the plane shot upw ards on the column of hot air rising from the chimneys, only to fall as suddenly when it passed into the descending chill bey ond."What a marv ellous switchback!" Lenina laughed delightedly .But Henry's tone w as almost, for a moment, melancholy . "Do y ou know what that switchback w as?" he said. "It w as some human being finally and definitely disappearing. Going up in a squirt of hot gas. It would be curious to know who it w as–a man or a woman, an Alpha or an Epsilon. …" He sighed. Then, in a resolutely cheerful v oice, "An y-how," he concluded, "there's one thing we can be certain of; whoev er he ma y have been, he w as happ y when he w as aliv e. Everybody's happy now .""Yes, ev erybody's happ y now ," echoed Lenina. They had heard the words repeated a hundred and fift y times ev ery night for twelv e years.Landing on the roof of Henry's fort y-story apartment house in W est-minster , they went str aight down to the dining-hall. There, in a loud and cheerful compan y, they ate an ex cellent meal. Soma was serv ed with the coffee. Lenina took two half -gramme tablets and Henry three.  At twent y past nine they w alked across the street to the newly opened Westminster Abbey Cabaret. It w as a night almost without clouds, moonless and starry; but of this on the whole depressing fact Lenina and Henry were fortunately una ware. The electric sky -signs effectiv ely shut off the outer darkness. "CAL VIN ST OPES AND HIS SIXTEEN SEXOPHONIST S." From the façade of the new Abbey the giant letters invitingly glared. "L ONDON'S FINEST SCENT AND COL OUR ORGAN. ALL THE LA TEST SYNTHETIC MUSIC."They entered. The air seemed hot and somehow breathless with the scent of ambergris and sandalwood. On the domed ceiling of the hall, the colour organ had momentarily painted a tropical sunset. The Six-teen Sex ophonists were pla ying an old fa vourite: "There ain't no Bottle  in all the world lik e that dear little Bottle of mine." F our hundred cou-ples were fiv e-stepping round the polished floor . Lenina and Henry were soon the four hundred and first. The sax ophones w ailed lik e me-lodious cats under the moon, moaned in the alto and tenor registers as  though the little death were upon them. Rich with a wealth of harmon-ics, their tremulous chorus mounted tow ards a climax, louder and ev er louder –until at last, with a w ave of his hand, the conductor let loose the final shattering note of ether -music and blew the sixteen merely human blowers clean out of existence. Thunder in A flat major . And then, in all but silence, in all but darkness, there followed a gr adual deturgescence, a diminuendo sliding gr adually , through quarter tones, down, down to a faintly whispered dominant chord that lingered on (while the fiv e-four rh ythms still pulsed below) charging the dark ened seconds with an intense expectancy . And at last expectancy w as ful-filled. There w as a sudden explosiv e sunrise, and simultaneously , the Sixteen burst into song:"Bottle of mine, it's you I've always wanted!Bottle of mine, why was I ever decanted?  Skies are blue inside of you,  The weather's always fine;ForThere ain't no Bottle in all the worldLike that dear little Bottle of mine."Five-stepping with the other four hundred round and round W estmin-ster Abbey , Lenina and Henry were y et dancing in another world–the warm, the richly coloured, the infinitely friendly world of soma-holida y. How kind, how good-looking, how delightfully amusing ev ery one w as! "Bottle of mine, it's y ou I'v e always wanted …" But Lenina and Henry had what they w anted … They were inside, here and now -safely inside with the fine weather , the perennially blue sky . And when, exhausted, the Sixteen had laid b y their sax ophones and the S ynthetic Music ap-paratus w as producing the v ery latest in slow Malthusian Blues, they might ha ve been twin embry os gently rocking together on the w aves of a bottled ocean of blood-surrogate."Good-night, dear friends. Good-night, dear friends." The loud speak-ers veiled their commands in a genial and musical politeness. "Good-night, dear friends …"Obediently , with all the others, Lenina and Henry left the building. The depressing stars had tr avelled quite some w ay across the hea vens. But  though the separ ating screen of the sky -signs had now to a great ex-tent dissolv ed, the two y oung people still retained their happ y igno-rance of the night.Swallowing half an hour before closing time, that second dose of soma had raised a quite impenetr able w all between the actual univ erse and their minds. Bottled, they crossed the street; bottled, they took the lift  up to Henry's room on the twent y-eighth floor . And y et, bottled as she was, and in spite of that second gr amme of soma, Lenina did not for-get to tak e all the contr aceptiv e precautions prescribed b y the regula-tions. Y ears of intensiv e hypnopædia and, from twelv e to sev enteen, Malthusian drill three times a week had made the taking of these pre-cautions almost as automatic and inevitable as blinking."Oh, and that reminds me," she said, as she came back from the bath-room, "F anny Crowne w ants to know where y ou found that lo vely green morocco-surrogate cartridge belt y ou ga ve me."§ 2ALTERNA TE Thursda ys were Bernard's Solidarit y Service da ys. After an  early dinner at the Aphroditz eum (to which Helrnholtz had recently been elected under R ule Two) he took lea ve of his friend and, hailing a taxi on the roof told the man to fly to the F ordson Communit y Singery . The machine rose a couple of hundred metres, then headed eastw ards, and as it turned, there before Bernard's ey es, gigantically beautiful, was the Singery . Flood-lighted, its three hundred and twent y metres of  white Carr ara-surrogate gleamed with a snowy incandescence o ver Ludgate Hill; at each of the four corners of its helicopter platform an immense T shone crimson against the night, and from the mouths of twent y-four v ast golden trumpets rumbled a solemn synthetic music."Damn, I'm late," Bernard said to himself as he first caught sight of Big Henry , the Singery clock. And sure enough, as he w as pa ying off his cab , Big Henry sounded the hour . "Ford," sang out an immense bass v oice from all the golden trumpets. "F ord, F ord, F ord …" Nine times. Bernard r an for the lift.The great auditorium for F ord's Da y celebr ations and other massed Communit y Sings w as at the bottom of the building. Abo ve it, a hun-dred to each floor , were the sev en thousand rooms used b y Solidarit y Groups for their fortnight services. Bernard dropped down to floor thirty-three, hurried along the corridor , stood hesitating for a moment outside R oom 3210, then, ha ving wound himself up , opened the door and w alked in.Thank F ord! he w as not the last. Three chairs of the twelv e arranged round the circular table were still unoccupied. He slipped into the nearest of them as inconspicuously as he could and prepared to frown at the y et later comers whenev er they should arriv e.Turning tow ards him, "What were y ou pla ying this afternoon?" the girl on his left enquired. "Obstacle, or Electro-magnetic?"Bernard look ed at her (F ord! it w as Morgana R othschild) and blushingly  had to admit that he had been pla ying neither . Morgana stared at him with astonishment. There w as an a wkward silence.Then pointedly she turned a way and addressed herself to the more sporting man on her left."A good beginning for a Solidarit y Service," thought Bernard miser ably, and foresa w for himself y et another failure to achiev e atonement. If only he had giv en himself time to look around instead of scuttling for the nearest chair! He could ha ve sat between Fifi Br adlaugh and Jo-anna Diesel. Instead of which he had gone and blindly planted himself next to Morgana. Morgana! Ford! Those black ey ebrows of hers–that eyebrow , rather –for they met abo ve the nose. F ord! And on his right was Clar a Deterding. T rue, Clar a's ey ebrows didn't meet. But she w as really too pneumatic. Whereas Fifi and Joanna were absolutely right. Plump , blonde, not too large … And it w as that great lout, T om Kawa-guchi, who now took the seat between them.The last arriv al was Sarojini Engels."You're late," said the President of the Group sev erely. "Don't let it happen again."Sarojini apologiz ed and slid into her place between Jim Bokano vsky and Herbert Bakunin. The group w as now complete, the solidarit y cir-cle perfect and without fla w. Man, woman, man, in a ring of endless alternation round the table. T welve of them ready to be made one, waiting to come together , to be fused, to lose their twelv e separ ate identities in a larger being.The President stood up , made the sign of the T and, switching on the synthetic music, let loose the soft indefatigable beating of drums and a  choir of instruments–near -wind and super -string–that plangently re-peated and repeated the brief and unescapably haunting melody of the  first Solidarit y Hymn. Again, again– and it w as not the ear that heard the pulsing rh ythm, it w as the midriff; the w ail and clang of those re-curring harmonies haunted, not the mind, but the y earning bowels of compassion.The President made another sign of the T and sat down. The service had begun. The dedicated soma tablets were placed in the centre of the table. The lo ving cup of str awberry ice-cream soma was passed from hand to hand and, with the formula, "I drink to m y annihilation," twelv e times quaffed. Then to the accompaniment of the synthetic or-chestr a the First Solidarit y Hymn w as sung."Ford, we are twelve; oh, make us one,  Like drops within the Social River,Oh, make us now together run  As swiftly as thy shining Flivver."Twelve yearning stanzas. And then the lo ving cup w as passed a second  time. "I drink to the Greater Being" w as now the formula. All dr ank. Tirelessly the music pla yed. The drums beat. The crying and clashing of the harmonies were an obsession in the melted bowels. The Second Solidarit y Hymn w as sung."Come, Greater Being, Social Friend,  Annihilating Twelve-in-One!We long to die, for when we end,  Our larger life has but begun."Again twelv e stanzas. By this time the soma had begun to work. Ey es shone, cheeks were flushed, the inner light of univ ersal benev olence broke out on ev ery face in happ y, friendly smiles. Ev en Bernard felt himself a little melted. When Morgana R othschild turned and beamed at him, he did his best to beam back. But the ey ebrow , that black two-in-one– alas, it w as still there; he couldn't ignore it, couldn't, howev er hard he tried. The melting hadn't gone far enough. P erhaps if he had been sitting between Fifi and Joanna … F or the third time the lo ving cup went round; "I drink to the imminence of His Coming," said Mor-gana R othschild, whose turn it happened to be to initiate the circular rite. Her tone w as loud, exultant. She dr ank and passed the cup to Bernard. "I drink to the imminence of His Coming," he repeated, with a sincere attempt to feel that the coming w as imminent; but the ey e-brow continued to haunt him, and the Coming, so far as he w as con-cerned, w as horribly remote. He dr ank and handed the cup to Clar a Deterding. "It'll be a failure again," he said to himself . "I know it will." But he went on doing his best to beam.The lo ving cup had made its circuit. Lifting his hand, the President gave a signal; the chorus brok e out into the third Solidarit y Hymn."Feel how the Greater Being comes!  Rejoice and, in rejoicings, die!Melt in the music of the drums!  For I am you and you are I."As verse succeeded v erse the v oices thrilled with an ev er intenser ex-citement. The sense of the Coming's imminence w as like an electric tension in the air . The President switched off the music and, with the final note of the final stanza, there w as absolute silence–the silence of stretched expectancy , quiv ering and creeping with a galv anic life. The President reached out his hand; and suddenly a V oice, a deep strong Voice, more musical than an y merely human v oice, richer , warmer , more vibr ant with lo ve and y earning and compassion, a wonderful, mysterious, supernatur al Voice spok e from abo ve their heads. V ery slowly , "Oh, F ord, F ord, F ord," it said diminishingly and on a descend-ing scale. A sensation of w armth r adiated thrillingly out from the solar plexus to ev ery extremit y of the bodies of those who listened; tears came into their ey es; their hearts, their bowels seemed to mo ve within  them, as though with an independent life. "F ord!" they were melting, "Ford!" dissolv ed, dissolv ed. Then, in another tone, suddenly , star-tlingly . "Listen!" trumpeted the v oice. "Listen!" They listened. After a pause, sunk to a whisper , but a whisper , somehow , more penetr ating than the loudest cry . "The feet of the Greater Being," it went on, and repeated the words: "The feet of the Greater Being." The whisper al-most expired. "The feet of the Greater Being are on the stairs." And once more there w as silence; and the expectancy , momentarily re-laxed, w as stretched again, tauter , tauter , almost to the tearing point. The feet of the Greater Being–oh, they heard them, they heard them, coming softly down the stairs, coming nearer and nearer down the in-visible stairs. The feet of the Greater Being. And suddenly the tearing point w as reached. Her ey es staring, her lips parted. Morgana Rothschild spr ang to her feet."I hear him," she cried. "I hear him.""He's coming," shouted Sarojini Engels."Yes, he's coming, I hear him." Fifi Br adlaugh and T om Kawaguchi rose  simultaneously to their feet."Oh, oh, oh!" Joanna inarticulately testified."He's coming!" y elled Jim Bokano vsky.The President leaned forw ard and, with a touch, released a delirium of cymbals and blown br ass, a fev er of tom-tomming."Oh, he's coming!" screamed Clar a Deterding. "Aie!" and it w as as though she were ha ving her throat cut.Feeling that it w as time for him to do something, Bernard also jumped up and shouted: "I hear him; He's coming." But it w asn't true. He heard nothing and, for him, nobody w as coming. Nobody –in spite of the music, in spite of the mounting ex citement. But he w aved his arms, he shouted with the best of them; and when the others began to  jig and stamp and shuffle, he also jigged and shuffled.Round they went, a circular procession of dancers, each with hands on the hips of the dancer preceding, round and round, shouting in unison,  stamping to the rh ythm of the music with their feet, beating it, beating  it out with hands on the buttocks in front; twelv e pairs of hands beat-ing as one; as one, twelv e buttocks slabbily resounding. T welve as one, twelv e as one. "I hear Him, I hear Him coming." The music quick-ened; faster beat the feet, faster , faster fell the rh ythmic hands. And all at once a great synthetic bass boomed out the words which an-nounced the approaching atonement and final consummation of soli-darity, the coming of the T welve-in-One, the incarnation of the Greater  Being. "Orgy -porgy ," it sang, while the tom-toms continued to beat their fev erish tattoo:"Orgy-porgy, Ford and fun,Kiss the girls and make them One.Boys at 0ne with girls at peace;Orgy-porgy gives release.""Orgy -porgy ," the dancers caught up the liturgical refr ain, "Orgy -porgy , Ford and fun, kiss the girls …" And as they sang, the lights began slowly to fade–to fade and at the same time to grow w armer , richer , redder , until at last they were dancing in the crimson twilight of an Embry o Store. "Orgy -porgy …" In their blood-coloured and foetal dark-ness the dancers continued for a while to circulate, to beat and beat out the indefatigable rh ythm. "Orgy -porgy …" Then the circle w avered, broke, fell in partial disintegr ation on the ring of couches which sur-rounded–circle enclosing circle–the table and its planetary chairs. "Orgy -porgy …" T enderly the deep V oice crooned and cooed; in the red  twilight it w as as though some enormous negro do ve were ho vering benev olently o ver the now prone or supine dancers.They were standing on the roof; Big Henry had just sung elev en. The night w as calm and w arm."Wasn't it wonderful?" said Fifi Br adlaugh. "W asn't it simply wonder-ful?" She look ed at Bernard with an expression of r apture, but of r ap-ture in which there w as no tr ace of agitation or ex citement –for to be excited is still to be unsatisfied. Hers w as the calm ecstasy of achiev ed consummation, the peace, not of mere v acant satiet y and nothingness,  but of balanced life, of energies at rest and in equilibrium. A rich and living peace. F or the Solidarit y Service had giv en as well as tak en, drawn off only to replenish. She w as full, she w as made perfect, she was still more than merely herself . "Didn't y ou think it w as wonderful?"  she insisted, looking into Bernard's face with those supernatur ally shining ey es."Yes, I thought it w as wonderful," he lied and look ed away; the sight of  her tr ansfigured face w as at once an accusation and an ironical re-minder of his own separ ateness. He w as as miser ably isolated now as he had been when the service began–more isolated b y reason of his unreplenished emptiness, his dead satiet y. Separ ate and unatoned, while the others were being fused into the Greater Being; alone ev en in Morgana's embr ace–much more alone, indeed, more hopelessly himself than he had ev er been in his life before. He had emerged from that crimson twilight into the common electric glare with a self -consciousness intensified to the pitch of agon y. He w as utterly miser-able, and perhaps (her shining ey es accused him), perhaps it w as his own fault. "Quite wonderful," he repeated; but the only thing he could think of w as Morgana's ey ebrow .Chapter SixODD, ODD , odd, was Lenina's v erdict on Bernard Marx. So odd, in-deed, that in the course of the succeeding weeks she had wondered more than once whether she shouldn't change her mind about the New  Mexico holida y, and go instead to the North P ole with Benito Hoo ver. The trouble w as that she knew the North P ole, had been there with George Edz el only last summer , and what w as more, found it prett y grim. Nothing to do , and the hotel too hopelessly old-fashioned–no television laid on in the bedrooms, no scent organ, only the most pu-trid synthetic music, and not more than twent y-five Escalator -Squash Courts for o ver two hundred guests. No , decidedly she couldn't face the North P ole again. Added to which, she had only been to America once before. And ev en then, how inadequately! A cheap week -end in New Y ork–had it been with Jean- Jacques Habibullah or Bokano vsky Jones? She couldn't remember . Anyhow, it was of absolutely no impor-tance. The prospect of flying W est again, and for a whole week, w as very in viting. Moreo ver, for at least three da ys of that week they would  be in the Sa vage R eserv ation. Not more than half a doz en people in the whole Centre had ev er been inside a Sa vage R eserv ation. As an Alpha-Plus psy chologist, Bernard w as one of the few men she knew entitled to a permit. F or Lenina, the opportunit y was unique. And y et, so unique also w as Bernard's oddness that she had hesitated to tak e it, had actually thought of risking the P ole again with funn y old Benito . At least Benito w as normal. Whereas Bernard …"Alcohol in his blood-surrogate," w as Fanny's explanation of ev ery ec-centricit y. But Henry , with whom, one ev ening when they were in bed together , Lenina had r ather anxiously discussed her new lo ver, Henry had compared poor Bernard to a rhinoceros."You can't teach a rhinoceros tricks," he had explained in his brief and vigorous st yle. "Some men are almost rhinoceroses; they don't re-spond properly to conditioning. P oor Devils! Bernard's one of them. Luckily for him, he's prett y good at his job . Otherwise the Director would nev er have kept him. Howev er," he added consolingly , "I think he's prett y harmless."Pretty harmless, perhaps; but also prett y disquieting. That mania, to start with, for doing things in priv ate. Which meant, in pr actice, not doing an ything at all. F or what w as there that one could do in priv ate. (Apart, of course, from going to bed: but one couldn't do that all the time.) Y es, what was there? Precious little. The first afternoon they went out together w as particularly fine. Lenina had suggested a swim at Toquay Country Club followed b y dinner at the Oxford Union. But Bernard thought there would be too much of a crowd. Then what about a round of Electro-magnetic Golf at St. Andrew's? But again, no:  Bernard considered that Electro-magnetic Golf w as a w aste of time."Then what's time for?" ask ed Lenina in some astonishment.Apparently , for going w alks in the Lak e District; for that w as what he now proposed. Land on the top of Skidda w and w alk for a couple of hours in the heather . "Alone with y ou, Lenina.""But, Bernard, we shall be alone all night."Bernard blushed and look ed away. "I meant, alone for talking," he mumbled."Talking? But what about?" W alking and talking–that seemed a v ery odd w ay of spending an afternoon.In the end she persuaded him, much against his will, to fly o ver to Amsterdam to see the Semi-Demi-Finals of the W omen's Hea vyweight Wrestling Championship ."In a crowd," he grumbled. "As usual." He remained obstinately gloom y the whole afternoon; wouldn't talk to Lenina's friends (of whom they met doz ens in the ice-cream soma bar between the wres-tling bouts); and in spite of his misery absolutely refused to tak e the half-gramme r aspberry sundae which she pressed upon him. "I'd rather be m yself," he said. "Myself and nast y. Not somebody else, howev er jolly .""A gramme in time sa ves nine," said Lenina, producing a bright treas-ure of sleep-taught wisdom. Bernard pushed a way the proffered glass impatiently ."Now don't lose y our temper ," she said. "R emember one cubic centi-metre cures ten gloom y sentiments.""Oh, for F ord's sak e, be quiet!" he shouted.Lenina shrugged her shoulders. "A gr amme is alw ays better than a damn," she concluded with dignit y, and dr ank the sundae herself .On their w ay back across the Channel, Bernard insisted on stopping his  propeller and ho vering on his helicopter screws within a hundred feet of the w aves. The weather had tak en a change for the worse; a south-westerly wind had sprung up , the sky w as cloudy ."Look," he commanded."But it's horrible," said Lenina, shrinking back from the window . She was appalled b y the rushing emptiness of the night, b y the black foam-fleck ed water hea ving beneath them, b y the pale face of the moon, so haggard and distr acted among the hastening clouds. "Let's turn on the r adio. Quick!" She reached for the dialling knob on the dash-board and turned it at r andom."… skies are blue inside of y ou," sang sixteen tremoloing falsettos, "the weather's alw ays …"Then a hiccough and silence. Bernard had switched off the current."I want to look at the sea in peace," he said. "One can't ev en look with  that beastly noise going on.""But it's lo vely. And I don't w ant to look.""But I do ," he insisted. "It mak es me feel as though …" he hesitated, searching for words with which to express himself , "as though I were more me, if you see what I mean. More on m y own, not so completely a part of something else. Not just a cell in the social body . Doesn't it make you feel lik e that, Lenina?"But Lenina w as crying. "It's horrible, it's horrible," she k ept repeating. "And how can y ou talk lik e that about not w anting to be a part of the social body? After all, ev ery one works for ev ery one else. W e can't do without an y one. Ev en Epsilons …""Yes, I know ," said Bernard derisiv ely. "'Ev en Epsilons are useful'! So am I. And I damned well wish I weren't!"Lenina w as shock ed by his blasphem y. "Bernard!" She protested in a voice of amaz ed distress. "How can y ou?"In a different k ey, "How can I?" he repeated meditativ ely. "No, the real  problem is: How is it that I can't, or r ather –because, after all, I know quite well wh y I can't –what would it be lik e if I could, if I were free–not ensla ved by my conditioning.""But, Bernard, y ou're sa ying the most a wful things.""Don't y ou wish y ou were free, Lenina?""I don't know what y ou mean. I am free. Free to ha ve the most won-derful time. Ev erybody's happ y now adays."He laughed, "Y es, 'Ev erybody's happ y now adays.' W e begin giving the children that at fiv e. But wouldn't y ou lik e to be free to be happ y in some other w ay, Lenina? In y our own w ay, for example; not in ev ery-body else's w ay.""I don't know what y ou mean," she repeated. Then, turning to him, "Oh, do let's go back, Bernard," she besought; "I do so hate it here.""Don't y ou lik e being with me?""But of course, Bernard. It's this horrible place.""I thought we'd be more … more together here– with nothing but the sea and moon. More together than in that crowd, or ev en in m y rooms. Don't y ou understand that?""I don't understand an ything," she said with decision, determined to preserv e her incomprehension intact. "Nothing. Least of all," she con-tinued in another tone "wh y you don't tak e soma when y ou ha ve these  dreadful ideas of y ours. Y ou'd forget all about them. And instead of feeling miser able, y ou'd be jolly . So jolly," she repeated and smiled, for  all the puzzled anxiet y in her ey es, with what w as meant to be an in-viting and v oluptuous cajolery .He look ed at her in silence, his face unresponsiv e and v ery gr ave–looked at her intently . After a few seconds Lenina's ey es flinched away; she uttered a nerv ous little laugh, tried to think of something to  say and couldn't. The silence prolonged itself .When Bernard spok e at last, it w as in a small tired v oice. "All right then," he said, "we'll go back." And stepping hard on the acceler ator, he sent the machine rock eting up into the sky . At four thousand he started his propeller . They flew in silence for a minute or two . Then, suddenly , Bernard began to laugh. R ather oddly , Lenina thought, but still, it w as laughter ."Feeling better?" she v entured to ask.For answer , he lifted one hand from the controls and, slipping his arm around her , began to fondle her breasts."Thank F ord," she said to herself , "he's all right again."Half an hour later they were back in his rooms. Bernard sw allowed four  tablets of soma at a gulp , turned on the r adio and television and began  to undress."Well," Lenina enquired, with significant archness when they met next afternoon on the roof , "did y ou think it w as fun y esterda y?"Bernard nodded. They climbed into the plane. A little jolt, and they were off ."Every one sa ys I'm a wfully pneumatic," said Lenina reflectiv ely, pat-ting her own legs."Awfully ." But there w as an expression of pain in Bernard's ey es. "Lik e meat," he w as thinking.She look ed up with a certain anxiet y. "But y ou don't think I'm too plump , do y ou?"He shook his head. Lik e so much meat."You think I'm all right." Another nod. "In ev ery w ay?""Perfect," he said aloud. And in wardly. "She thinks of herself that w ay. She doesn't mind being meat."Lenina smiled triumphantly . But her satisfaction w as premature."All the same," he went on, after a little pause, "I still r ather wish it had all ended differently .""Differently?" W ere there other endings?"I didn't w ant it to end with our going to bed," he specified.Lenina w as astonished."Not at once, not the first da y.""But then what …?"He began to talk a lot of incomprehensible and dangerous nonsense. Lenina did her best to stop the ears of her mind; but ev ery now and then a phr ase would insist on becoming audible. "… to try the effect of arresting m y impulses," she heard him sa y. The words seemed to touch a spring in her mind."Never put off till to-morrow the fun y ou can ha ve to-da y," she said gravely."Two hundred repetitions, twice a week from fourteen to sixteen and a half," was all his comment. The mad bad talk r ambled on. "I w ant to know what passion is," she heard him sa ying. "I w ant to feel some-thing strongly .""When the individual feels, the communit y reels," Lenina pronounced."Well, wh y shouldn't it reel a bit?""Bernard!"But Bernard remained unabashed."Adults intellectually and during working hours," he went on. "Infants where feeling and desire are concerned.""Our F ord lo ved infants."Ignoring the interruption. "It suddenly struck me the other da y," con-tinued Bernard, "that it might be possible to be an adult all the time.""I don't understand." Lenina's tone w as firm."I know y ou don't. And that's wh y we went to bed together y ester-day–like infants–instead of being adults and w aiting.""But it w as fun," Lenina insisted. "W asn't it?""Oh, the greatest fun," he answered, but in a v oice so mournful, with an expression so profoundly miser able, that Lenina felt all her triumph suddenly ev aporate. P erhaps he had found her too plump , after all."I told y ou so ," was all that F anny said, when Lenina came and made her confidences. "It's the alcohol they put in his surrogate.""All the same," Lenina insisted. "I do lik e him. He has such a wfully nice  hands. And the w ay he mo ves his shoulders–that's v ery attr active." She sighed. "But I wish he weren't so odd."§ 2HALTING for a moment outside the door of the Director's room, Ber-nard drew a deep breath and squared his shoulders, br acing himself to  meet the dislik e and disappro val which he w as certain of finding within. He knock ed and entered."A permit for y ou to initial, Director ," he said as airily as possible, and laid the paper on the writing-table.The Director glanced at him sourly . But the stamp of the W orld Con-troller's Office w as at the head of the paper and the signature of Mus-tapha Mond, bold and black, across the bottom. Ev erything w as per-fectly in order . The director had no choice. He pencilled his initials–two small pale letters abject at the feet of Mustapha Mond– and w as about to return the paper without a word of comment or genial F ord-speed, when his ey e was caught b y something written in the body of the per-mit."For the New Mexican R eserv ation?" he said, and his tone, the face he lifted to Bernard, expressed a kind of agitated astonishment.Surprised b y his surprise, Bernard nodded. There w as a silence.The Director leaned back in his chair , frowning. "How long ago w as it?"  he said, speaking more to himself than to Bernard. "T wenty years, I suppose. Nearer twent y-five. I must ha ve been y our age …" He sighed and shook his head.Bernard felt extremely uncomfortable. A man so con ventional, so scru-pulously correct as the Director –and to commit so gross a solecism! lt made him w ant to hide his face, to run out of the room. Not that he himself sa w anything intrinsically objectionable in people talking about the remote past; that w as one of those h ypnopædic prejudices he had (so he imagined) completely got rid of . What made him feel sh y was the knowledge that the Director disappro ved–disappro ved and y et had been betr ayed into doing the forbidden thing. Under what in ward com-pulsion? Through his discomfort Bernard eagerly listened."I had the same idea as y ou," the Director w as saying. "W anted to have a look at the sa vages. Got a permit for New Mexico and went there for m y summer holida y. With the girl I w as ha ving at the mo-ment. She w as a Beta-Minus, and I think" (he shut his ey es), "I think she had y ellow hair . Anyhow she w as pneumatic, particularly pneu-matic; I remember that. W ell, we went there, and we look ed at the savages, and we rode about on horses and all that. And then–it w as almost the last da y of m y leave–then … well, she got lost. W e'd gone riding up one of those rev olting mountains, and it w as horribly hot and  oppressiv e, and after lunch we went to sleep . Or at least I did. She must ha ve gone for a w alk, alone. A t any rate, when I wok e up, she wasn't there. And the most frightful thunderstorm I'v e ever seen w as just bursting on us. And it poured and roared and flashed; and the horses brok e loose and r an away; and I fell down, trying to catch them, and hurt m y knee, so that I could hardly w alk. Still, I searched and I shouted and I searched. But there w as no sign of her . Then I thought she must ha ve gone back to the rest -house b y herself . So I crawled down into the v alley b y the w ay we had come. My knee w as agonizingly painful, and I'd lost m y soma. It took me hours. I didn't get back to the rest -house till after midnight. And she w asn't there; she w asn't there," the Director repeated. There w as a silence. "W ell," he resumed at last, "the next da y there w as a search. But we couldn't find her . She must ha ve fallen into a gully somewhere; or been eaten by a mountain lion. F ord knows. An yhow it w as horrible. It upset me very much at the time. More than it ought to ha ve done, I dare sa y. Because, after all, it's the sort of accident that might ha ve happened to any one; and, of course, the social body persists although the com-ponent cells ma y change." But this sleep-taught consolation did not seem to be v ery effectiv e. Shaking his head, "I actually dream about it  sometimes," the Director went on in a low v oice. "Dream of being woken up b y that peal of thunder and finding her gone; dream of searching and searching for her under the trees." He lapsed into the silence of reminiscence."You must ha ve had a terrible shock," said Bernard, almost en viously .At the sound of his v oice the Director started into a guilt y realization of  where he w as; shot a glance at Bernard, and a verting his ey es, blushed darkly; look ed at him again with sudden suspicion and, angrily  on his dignit y, "Don't imagine," he said, "that I'd had an y indecorous relation with the girl. Nothing emotional, nothing long-dr awn. It w as all perfectly health y and normal." He handed Bernard the permit. "I really  don't know wh y I bored y ou with this trivial anecdote." Furious with himself for ha ving giv en away a discreditable secret, he v ented his rage on Bernard. The look in his ey es was now fr ankly malignant. "And  I should lik e to tak e this opportunit y, Mr. Marx," he went on, "of sa ying that I'm not at all pleased with the reports I receiv e of y our beha viour outside working hours. Y ou ma y say that this is not m y business. But it  is. I ha ve the good name of the Centre to think of . My work ers must be abo ve suspicion, particularly those of the highest castes. Alphas are  so conditioned that they do not have to be infantile in their emotional behaviour. But that is all the more reason for their making a special ef-fort to conform. lt is their dut y to be infantile, ev en against their incli-nation. And so , Mr. Marx, I giv e you fair w arning." The Director's v oice vibrated with an indignation that had now become wholly righteous and impersonal– was the expression of the disappro val of Societ y itself . "If ev er I hear again of an y lapse from a proper standard of infantile decorum, I shall ask for y our tr ansference to a Sub-Centre–prefer ably to Iceland. Good morning." And swiv elling round in his chair , he pick ed up his pen and began to write."That'll teach him," he said to himself . But he w as mistak en. For Ber-nard left the room with a sw agger , exulting, as he banged the door behind him, in the thought that he stood alone, embattled against the order of things; elated b y the into xicating consciousness of his individ-ual significance and importance. Ev en the thought of persecution left him undisma yed, w as rather tonic than depressing. He felt strong enough to meet and o vercome affliction, strong enough to face ev en Iceland. And this confidence w as the greater for his not for a moment really believing that he would be called upon to face an ything at all. People simply weren't tr ansferred for things lik e that. Iceland w as just a threat. A most stimulating and life-giving threat. W alking along the corridor , he actually whistled.Heroic w as the account he ga ve that ev ening of his interview with the D.H.C. "Whereupon," it concluded, "I simply told him to go to the Bot-tomless P ast and marched out of the room. And that w as that." He looked at Helmholtz W atson expectantly , awaiting his due rew ard of sympath y, encour agement, admir ation. But no word came. Helmholtz sat silent, staring at the floor .He lik ed Bernard; he w as grateful to him for being the only man of his acquaintance with whom he could talk about the subjects he felt to be important. Nev ertheless, there were things in Bernard which he hated.  This boasting, for example. And the outbursts of an abject self -pity with which it alternated. And his deplor able habit of being bold after the ev ent, and full, in absence, of the most extr aordinary presence of mind. He hated these things–just because he lik ed Bernard. The sec-onds passed. Helmholtz continued to stare at the floor . And suddenly Bernard blushed and turned a way.§ 3THE journey w as quite unev entful. The Blue P acific R ocket was two and a half minutes early at New Orleans, lost four minutes in a tornado  over Texas, but flew into a fa vourable air current at Longitude 95 West, and w as able to land at Santa Fé less than fort y seconds behind schedule time."Forty seconds on a six and a half hour flight. Not so bad," Lenina con-ceded.They slept that night at Santa Fé. The hotel w as ex cellent –incompar a-bly better , for example, than that horrible A urora Bor a Palace in which Lenina had suffered so much the previous summer . Liquid air , televi-sion, vibro- vacuum massage, r adio, boiling caffeine solution, hot con-traceptiv es, and eight different kinds of scent were laid on in ev ery bedroom. The synthetic music plant w as working as they entered the hall and left nothing to be desired. A notice in the lift announced that there were sixt y Escalator -Squash-R acket Courts in the hotel, and that  Obstacle and Electro-magnetic Golf could both be pla yed in the park."But it sounds simply too lo vely," cried Lenina. "I almost wish we could  stay here. Sixt y Escalator -Squash Courts …""There won't be an y in the R eserv ation," Bernard w arned her . "And no scent, no television, no hot w ater ev en. If y ou feel y ou can't stand it, stay here till I come back."Lenina w as quite offended. "Of course I can stand it. I only said it w as lovely here because … well, because progress is lovely, isn't it?""Five hundred repetitions once a week from thirteen to sev enteen," said Bernard wearily , as though to himself ."What did y ou sa y?""I said that progress w as lovely. That's wh y you mustn't come to the Reserv ation unless y ou really w ant to .""But I do w ant to .""Very well, then," said Bernard; and it w as almost a threat.Their permit required the signature of the W arden of the R eserv ation, at whose office next morning they duly presented themselv es. An Epsilon-Plus negro porter took in Bernard's card, and they were admit-ted almost immediately .The W arden w as a blond and br achycephalic Alpha-Minus, short, red, moon-faced, and broad-shouldered, with a loud booming v oice, v ery well adapted to the utter ance of h ypnopædic wisdom. He w as a mine of irrelev ant information and unask ed-for good advice. Once started, he went on and on–boomingly ."… fiv e hundred and sixt y thousand square kilometres, divided into four distinct Sub-R eserv ations, each surrounded b y a high-tension wire  fence."At this moment, and for no apparent reason, Bernard suddenly re-membered that he had left the Eau de Cologne tap in his bathroom wide open and running."… supplied with current from the Gr and Can yon hydro-electric sta-tion.""Cost me a fortune b y the time I get back." With his mind's ey e, Ber-nard sa w the needle on the scent meter creeping round and round, antlik e, indefatigable. "Quickly telephone to Helmholtz W atson.""… upw ards of fiv e thousand kilometres of fencing at sixt y thousand volts.""You don't sa y so," said Lenina politely , not knowing in the least what the W arden had said, but taking her cue from his dr amatic pause. When the W arden started booming, she had inconspicuously sw allowed  half a gr amme of soma, with the result that she could now sit, se-renely not listening, thinking of nothing at all, but with her large blue eyes fix ed on the W arden's face in an expression of r apt attention."To touch the fence is instant death," pronounced the W arden sol-emnly . "There is no escape from a Sa vage R eserv ation."The word "escape" w as suggestiv e. "Perhaps," said Bernard, half ris-ing, "we ought to think of going." The little black needle w as scurrying,  an insect, nibbling through time, eating into his money ."No escape," repeated the W arden, w aving him back into his chair; and as the permit w as not y et countersigned Bernard had no choice but to obey . "Those who are born in the R eserv ation– and remember , my dear y oung lady ," he added, leering obscenely at Lenina, and speaking in an improper whisper , "remember that, in the R eserv ation, children still are born, y es, actually born, rev olting as that ma y seem …" (He hoped that this reference to a shameful subject would mak e Lenina blush; but she only smiled with simulated intelligence and said,  "You don't sa y so!" Disappointed, the W arden began again. ) "Those, I repeat who are born in the R eserv ation are destined to die there."Destined to die … A decilitre of Eau de Cologne ev ery minute. Six litres  an hour . "Perhaps," Bernard tried again, "we ought …"Leaning forw ard, the W arden tapped the table with his forefinger . "You ask me how man y people liv e in the R eserv ation. And I reply"–trium-phantly –"I reply that we do not know . We can only guess.""You don't sa y so.""My dear y oung lady , I do sa y so."Six times twent y-four–no, it would be nearer six times thirt y-six. Ber-nard w as pale and trembling with impatience. But inex orably the booming continued."… about sixt y thousand Indians and half -breeds … absolute sa vages …  our inspectors occasionally visit … otherwise, no communication what-ever with the civiliz ed world … still preserv e their repulsiv e habits and customs … marriage, if y ou know what that is, m y dear y oung lady; families … no conditioning … monstrous superstitions … Christianit y and totemism and ancestor worship … extinct languages, such as Zuñi and Spanish and A thapascan … pumas, porcupines and other ferocious  animals … infectious diseases … priests … v enomous lizards …""You don't sa y so?"They got a way at last. Bernard dashed to the telephone. Quick, quick; but it took him nearly three minutes to get on to Helmholtz W atson. "We might be among the sa vages already ," he complained. "Damned incompetence!""Have a gr amme," suggested Lenina.He refused, preferring his anger . And at last, thank F ord, he w as through and, y es, it w as Helmholtz; Helmholtz, to whom he explained what had happened, and who promised to go round at once, at once, and turn off the tap , yes, at once, but took this opportunit y to tell him what the D .H.C. had said, in public, y esterda y evening …"What? He's looking out for some one to tak e my place?" Bernard's voice w as agoniz ed. "So it's actually decided? Did he mention Iceland? You sa y he did? F ord! Iceland …" He hung up the receiv er and turned back to Lenina. His face w as pale, his expression utterly dejected."What's the matter?" she ask ed."The matter?" He dropped hea vily into a chair . "I'm going to be sent to  Iceland."Often in the past he had wondered what it would be lik e to be sub-jected (soma-less and with nothing but his own in ward resources to rely on) to some great trial, some pain, some persecution; he had even longed for affliction. As recently as a week ago , in the Director's office, he had imagined himself cour ageously resisting, stoically ac-cepting suffering without a word. The Director's threats had actually elated him, made him feel larger than life. But that, as he now real-ized, w as because he had not tak en the threats quite seriously , he had not believ ed that, when it came to the point, the D .H.C. would ev er do anything. Now that it look ed as though the threats were really to be fulfilled, Bernard w as appalled. Of that imagined stoicism, that theo-retical cour age, not a tr ace w as left.He raged against himself –what a fool!– against the Director –how unfair  not to giv e him that other chance, that other chance which, he now had no doubt at all, he had alw ays intended to tak e. And Iceland, Ice-land …Lenina shook her head. "W as and will mak e me ill," she quoted, "I tak e a gramme and only am."In the end she persuaded him to sw allow four tablets of soma. Five minutes later roots and fruits were abolished; the flower of the present  rosily blossomed. A message from the porter announced that, at the Warden's orders, a R eserv ation Guard had come round with a plane and w as waiting on the roof of the hotel. They went up at once. An oc-toroon in Gamma-green uniform saluted and proceeded to recite the morning's progr amme.A bird's-ey e view of ten or a doz en of the principal pueblos, then a landing for lunch in the v alley of Malpais. The rest -house w as comfort-able there, and up at the pueblo the sa vages would probably be cele-brating their summer festiv al. It would be the best place to spend the night.They took their seats in the plane and set off . Ten minutes later they were crossing the frontier that separ ated civilization from sa vagery . Uphill and down, across the deserts of salt or sand, through forests, into the violet depth of can yons, o ver crag and peak and table-topped mesa, the fence marched on and on, irresistibly the str aight line, the geometrical symbol of triumphant human purpose. And at its foot, here and there, a mosaic of white bones, a still unrotted carcase dark on the ta wny ground mark ed the place where deer or steer , puma or porcupine or co yote, or the greedy turk ey buzzards dr awn down b y the whiff of carrion and fulminated as though b y a poetic justice, had come  too close to the destro ying wires."They nev er learn," said the green-uniformed pilot, pointing down at the sk eletons on the ground below them. "And they nev er will learn," he added and laughed, as though he had somehow scored a personal triumph o ver the electrocuted animals.Bernard also laughed; after two gr ammes of soma the jok e seemed, for some reason, good. Laughed and then, almost immediately , dropped off to sleep , and sleeping w as carried o ver Taos and T esuque; over Nambe and Picuris and P ojoaque, o ver Sia and Cochiti, o ver La-guna and Acoma and the Enchanted Mesa, o ver Zuñi and Cibola and Ojo Caliente, and wok e at last to find the machine standing on the ground, Lenina carrying the suit -cases into a small square house, and the Gamma-green octoroon talking incomprehensibly with a y oung In-dian."Malpais," explained the pilot, as Bernard stepped out. "This is the rest-house. And there's a dance this afternoon at the pueblo . He'll tak e you there." He pointed to the sullen y oung sa vage. "Funn y, I expect." He grinned. "Ev erything they do is funn y." And with that he climbed into the plane and started up the engines. "Back to-morrow . And re-member ," he added reassuringly to Lenina, "they're perfectly tame; savages won't do y ou an y harm. They'v e got enough experience of gas  bombs to know that they mustn't pla y any tricks." Still laughing, he threw the helicopter screws into gear , acceler ated, and w as gone.Chapter SevenTHE MES A was like a ship becalmed in a str ait of lion-coloured dust. The channel wound between precipitous banks, and slanting from one wall to the other across the v alley r an a streak of green-the riv er and its fields. On the prow of that stone ship in the centre of the str ait, and  seemingly a part of it, a shaped and geometrical outcrop of the nak ed rock, stood the pueblo of Malpais. Block abo ve block, each story smaller than the one below , the tall houses rose lik e stepped and am-putated p yramids into the blue sky . At their feet la y a str aggle of low buildings, a criss-cross of w alls; and on three sides the precipices fell sheer into the plain. A few columns of smok e mounted perpendicularly into the windless air and were lost."Queer ," said Lenina. "V ery queer ." It w as her ordinary word of con-demnation. "I don't lik e it. And I don't lik e that man." She pointed to the Indian guide who had been appointed to tak e them up to the pueblo . Her feeling w as evidently reciprocated; the v ery back of the man, as he w alked along before them, w as hostile, sullenly contemp-tuous."Besides," she lowered her v oice, "he smells."Bernard did not attempt to den y it. They w alked on.Suddenly it w as as though the whole air had come aliv e and were pulsing, pulsing with the indefatigable mo vement of blood. Up there, in  Malpais, the drums were being beaten. Their feet fell in with the rhythm of that m ysterious heart; they quick ened their pace. Their path  led them to the foot of the precipice. The sides of the great mesa ship towered o ver them, three hundred feet to the gun wale."I wish we could ha ve brought the plane," said Lenina, looking up re-sentfully at the blank impending rock -face. "I hate w alking. And y ou feel so small when y ou're on the ground at the bottom of a hill."They w alked along for some w ay in the shadow of the mesa, rounded a projection, and there, in a w ater-worn r avine, w as the w ay up the companion ladder . They climbed. It w as a v ery steep path that zig-zagged from side to side of the gully . Sometimes the pulsing of the drums w as all but inaudible, at others they seemed to be beating only just round the corner .When they were half -way up, an eagle flew past so close to them that the wind of his wings blew chill on their faces. In a crevice of the rock lay a pile of bones. It w as all oppressiv ely queer , and the Indian smelt stronger and stronger . They emerged at last from the r avine into the full sunlight. The top of the mesa w as a flat deck of stone."Like the Charing- T Tower," was Lenina's comment. But she w as not al-lowed to enjo y her disco very of this reassuring resemblance for long. A  padding of soft feet made them turn round. Nak ed from throat to na-vel, their dark brown bodies painted with white lines ("lik e asphalt tennis courts," Lenina w as later to explain), their faces inhuman with daubings of scarlet, black and ochre, two Indians came running along the path. Their black hair w as braided with fo x fur and red flannel. Cloaks of turk ey feathers fluttered from their shoulders; huge feather diadems exploded gaudily round their heads. With ev ery step they took came the clink and r attle of their silv er bracelets, their hea vy necklaces of bone and turquoise beads. They came on without a word, running quietly in their deerskin moccasins. One of them w as holding a  feather brush; the other carried, in either hand, what look ed at a dis-tance lik e three or four pieces of thick rope. One of the ropes writhed uneasily , and suddenly Lenina sa w that they were snak es.The men came nearer and nearer; their dark ey es look ed at her , but without giving an y sign of recognition, an y smallest sign that they had seen her or were a ware of her existence. The writhing snak e hung limp  again with the rest. The men passed."I don't lik e it," said Lenina. "I don't lik e it."She lik ed ev en less what a waited her at the entr ance to the pueblo , where their guide had left them while he went inside for instructions. The dirt, to start with, the piles of rubbish, the dust, the dogs, the flies. Her face wrinkled up into a grimace of disgust. She held her handk erchief to her nose."But how can they liv e like this?" she brok e out in a v oice of indignant incredulit y. (It w asn't possible.)Bernard shrugged his shoulders philosophically . "Anyhow," he said, "they'v e been doing it for the last fiv e or six thousand y ears. So I sup-pose they must be used to it b y now .""But cleanliness is next to fordliness," she insisted."Yes, and civilization is sterilization," Bernard went on, concluding on a  tone of iron y the second h ypnopædic lesson in elementary h ygiene. "But these people ha ve nev er heard of Our F ord, and they aren't civi-lized. So there's no point in …""Oh!" She gripped his arm. "Look."An almost nak ed Indian w as very slowly climbing down the ladder from  the first -floor terr ace of a neighboring house–rung after rung, with the tremulous caution of extreme old age. His face w as profoundly wrin-kled and black, lik e a mask of obsidian. The toothless mouth had fallen  in. At the corners of the lips, and on each side of the chin, a few long bristles gleamed almost white against the dark skin. The long un-braided hair hung down in grey wisps round his face. His body w as bent and emaciated to the bone, almost fleshless. V ery slowly he came  down, pausing at each rung before he v entured another step ."What's the matter with him?" whispered Lenina. Her ey es were wide with horror and amaz ement."He's old, that's all," Bernard answered as carelessly as he could. He too w as startled; but he made an effort to seem unmo ved."Old?" she repeated. "But the Director's old; lots of people are old; they're not lik e that.""That's because we don't allow them to be lik e that. W e preserv e them  from diseases. W e keep their internal secretions artificially balanced at a youthful equilibrium. W e don't permit their magnesium-calcium r atio to fall below what it w as at thirt y. We give them tr ansfusion of y oung blood. W e keep their metabolism permanently stimulated. So , of course, they don't look lik e that. P artly," he added, "because most of them die long before they reach this old creature's age. Y outh almost unimpaired till sixt y, and then, cr ack! the end."But Lenina w as not listening. She w as watching the old man. Slowly , slowly he came down. His feet touched the ground. He turned. In their  deep-sunk en orbits his ey es were still extr aordinarily bright. They looked at her for a long moment expressionlessly , without surprise, as though she had not been there at all. Then slowly , with bent back the old man hobbled past them and w as gone."But it's terrible," Lenina whispered. "It's a wful. W e ought not to ha ve come here." She felt in her pock et for her soma–only to disco ver that, by some unprecedented o versight, she had left the bottle down at the rest-house. Bernard's pock ets were also empt y.Lenina w as left to face the horrors of Malpais unaided. They came crowding in on her thick and fast. The spectacle of two y oung women giving breast to their babies made her blush and turn a way her face. She had nev er seen an ything so indecent in her life. And what made it worse w as that, instead of tactfully ignoring it, Bernard proceeded to make open comments on this rev oltingly viviparous scene. Ashamed, now that the effects of the soma had worn off , of the weakness he had  displa yed that morning in the hotel, he went out of his w ay to show himself strong and unorthodo x."What a wonderfully intimate relationship ," he said, deliber ately outr a-geous. "And what an intensit y of feeling it must gener ate! I often think  one ma y have missed something in not ha ving had a mother . And per-haps y ou've missed something in not being a mother , Lenina. Imagine yourself sitting there with a little bab y of y our own. …""Bernard! How can y ou?" The passage of an old woman with oph-thalmia and a disease of the skin distr acted her from her indignation."Let's go a way," she begged. "I don't lik e it."But at this moment their guide came back and, beck oning them to fol-low, led the w ay down the narrow street between the houses. They rounded a corner . A dead dog w as lying on a rubbish heap; a woman with a goitre w as looking for lice in the hair of a small girl. Their guide halted at the foot of a ladder , raised his hand perpendicularly , then darted it horiz ontally forw ard. They did what he mutely command-ed–climbed the ladder and w alked through the doorw ay, to which it gave access, into a long narrow room, r ather dark and smelling of smok e and cook ed grease and long- worn, long-un washed clothes. A t the further end of the room w as another doorw ay, through which came  a shaft of sunlight and the noise, v ery loud and close, of the drums.They stepped across the threshold and found themselv es on a wide terrace. Below them, shut in b y the tall houses, w as the village square,  crowded with Indians. Bright blank ets, and feathers in black hair , and the glint of turquoise, and dark skins shining with heat. Lenina put her handk erchief to her nose again. In the open space at the centre of the square were two circular platforms of masonry and tr ampled cla y–the roofs, it w as evident, of underground chambers; for in the centre of each platform w as an open hatch way, with a ladder emerging from the  lower darkness. A sound of subterr anean flute pla ying came up and was almost lost in the steady remorseless persistence of the drums.Lenina lik ed the drums. Shutting her ey es she abandoned herself to their soft repeated thunder , allowed it to in vade her consciousness more and more completely , till at last there w as nothing left in the world but that one deep pulse of sound. It reminded her reassuringly of the synthetic noises made at Solidarit y Services and F ord's Da y celebr ations. "Orgy -porgy ," she whispered to herself . These drums beat out just the same rh ythms.There w as a sudden startling burst of singing–hundreds of male v oices crying out fiercely in harsh metallic unison. A few long notes and si-lence, the thunderous silence of the drums; then shrill, in a neighing treble, the women's answer . Then again the drums; and once more the  men's deep sa vage affirmation of their manhood.Queer –yes. The place w as queer , so w as the music, so were the clothes and the goitres and the skin diseases and the old people. But the performance itself –there seemed to be nothing specially queer about that."It reminds me of a lower -caste Communit y Sing," she told Bernard.But a little later it w as reminding her a good deal less of that innocu-ous function. F or suddenly there had sw armed up from those round chambers underground a ghastly troop of monsters. Hideously mask ed or painted out of all semblance of humanit y, they had tr amped out a strange limping dance round the square; round and again round, sing-ing as they went, round and round–each time a little faster; and the drums had changed and quick ened their rh ythm, so that it became lik e the pulsing of fev er in the ears; and the crowd had begun to sing with the dancers, louder and louder; and first one woman had shriek ed, and then another and another , as though they were being killed; and then suddenly the leader of the dancers brok e out of the line, r an to a big wooden chest which w as standing at one end of the square, r aised the lid and pulled out a pair of black snak es. A great y ell went up from the crowd, and all the other dancers r an tow ards him with out -stretched hands. He tossed the snak es to the first -comers, then dipped  back into the chest for more. More and more, black snak es and brown and mottled-he flung them out. And then the dance began again on a different rh ythm. R ound and round they went with their snak es, snak-ily, with a soft undulating mo vement at the knees and hips. R ound and  round. Then the leader ga ve a signal, and one after another , all the snakes were flung down in the middle of the square; an old man came up from underground and sprinkled them with corn meal, and from the  other hatch way came a woman and sprinkled them with w ater from a black jar . Then the old man lifted his hand and, startlingly , terrif yingly , there w as absolute silence. The drums stopped beating, life seemed to have come to an end. The old man pointed tow ards the two hatch ways that ga ve entr ance to the lower world. And slowly , raised b y invisible hands from below , there emerged from the one a painted image of an eagle, from the other that of a man, nak ed, and nailed to a cross. They hung there, seemingly self -sustained, as though w atching. The old man clapped his hands. Nak ed but for a white cotton breech-cloth, a boy of about eighteen stepped out of the crowd and stood before him, his hands crossed o ver his chest, his head bowed. The old man made the sign of the cross o ver him and turned a way. Slowly , the bo y began to w alk round the writhing heap of snak es. He had completed the first circuit and w as half -way through the second when, from among the dancers, a tall man wearing the mask of a co yote and hold-ing in his hand a whip of plaited leather , advanced tow ards him. The boy moved on as though una ware of the other's existence. The co yote-man r aised his whip , there w as a long moment of expectancy , then a swift mo vement, the whistle of the lash and its loud flat -sounding im-pact on the flesh. The bo y's body quiv ered; but he made no sound, he walked on at the same slow , steady pace. The co yote struck again, again; and at ev ery blow at first a gasp , and then a deep groan went up from the crowd. The bo y walked. Twice, thrice, four times round he went. The blood w as streaming. Fiv e times round, six times round. Suddenly Lenina co vered her face shish her hands and began to sob . "Oh, stop them, stop them!" she implored. But the whip fell and fell inexorably. Seven times round. Then all at once the bo y staggered and, still without a sound, pitched forw ard on to his face. Bending o ver him, the old man touched his back with a long white feather , held it up  for a moment, crimson, for the people to see then shook it thrice o ver the snak es. A few drops fell, and suddenly the drums brok e out again into a panic of hurrying notes; there w as a great shout. The dancers rushed forw ard, pick ed up the snak es and r an out of the square. Men, women, children, all the crowd r an after them. A minute later the square w as empt y, only the bo y remained, prone where he had fallen, quite still. Three old women came out of one of the houses, and with some difficult y lifted him and carried him in. The eagle and the man on  the cross k ept guard for a little while o ver the empt y pueblo; then, as though they had seen enough, sank slowly down through their hatch-ways, out of sight, into the nether world.Lenina w as still sobbing. "T oo awful," she k ept repeating, and all Ber-nard's consolations were in v ain. "T oo awful! That blood!" She shud-dered. "Oh, I wish I had m y soma."There w as the sound of feet in the inner room.Lenina did not mo ve, but sat with her face in her hands, unseeing, apart. Only Bernard turned round.The dress of the y oung man who now stepped out on to the terr ace was Indian; but his plaited hair w as str aw-coloured, his ey es a pale blue, and his skin a white skin, bronz ed."Hullo . Good-morrow ," said the str anger , in faultless but peculiar Eng-lish. "Y ou're civiliz ed, aren't y ou? Y ou come from the Other Place, out-side the R eserv ation?""Who on earth … ?" Bernard began in astonishment.The y oung man sighed and shook his head. "A most unhapp y gentle-man." And, pointing to the bloodstains in the centre of the square, "Do  you see that damned spot?" he ask ed in a v oice that trembled with emotion."A gramme is better than a damn," said Lenina mechanically from be-hind her hands. "I wish I had m y soma!""I ought to ha ve been there," the y oung man went on. "Wh y wouldn't they let me be the sacrifice? I'd ha ve gone round ten times–twelv e, fif-teen. P alowhtiw a only got as far as sev en. They could ha ve had twice as much blood from me. The multitudinous seas incarnadine." He flung  out his arms in a la vish gesture; then, despairingly , let them fall again.  "But they wouldn't let me. They dislik ed me for m y complexion. It's always been lik e that. Alw ays." T ears stood in the y oung man's ey es; he was ashamed and turned a way.Astonishment made Lenina forget the depriv ation of soma. She unco v-ered her face and, for the first time, look ed at the str anger . "Do y ou mean to sa y that y ou wanted to be hit with that whip?"Still a verted from her , the y oung man made a sign of affirmation. "F or the sak e of the pueblo–to mak e the r ain come and the corn grow . And to please P ookong and Jesus. And then to show that I can bear pain without crying out. Y es," and his v oice suddenly took on a new reso-nance, he turned with a proud squaring of the shoulders, a proud, de-fiant lifting of the chin "to show that I'm a man … Oh!" He ga ve a gasp  and w as silent, gaping. He had seen, for the first time in his life, the face of a girl whose cheeks were not the colour of chocolate or dog-skin, whose hair w as auburn and permanently w aved, and whose ex-pression (amazing no velty!) was one of benev olent interest. Lenina was smiling at him; such a nice-looking bo y, she w as thinking, and a really beautiful body . The blood rushed up into the y oung man's face; he dropped his ey es, raised them again for a moment only to find her still smiling at him, and w as so much o vercome that he had to turn away and pretend to be looking v ery hard at something on the other side of the square.Bernard's questions made a div ersion. Who? How? When? From where? K eeping his ey es fix ed on Bernard's face (for so passionately did he long to see Lenina smiling that he simply dared not look at her),  the young man tried to explain himself . Linda and he–Linda w as his mother (the word made Lenina look uncomfortable)– were str angers in the R eserv ation. Linda had come from the Other Place long ago , before  he was born, with a man who w as his father . (Bernard prick ed up his ears.) She had gone w alking alone in those mountains o ver there to the North, had fallen down a steep place and hurt her head. ("Go on, go on," said Bernard ex citedly .) Some hunters from Malpais had found her and brought her to the pueblo . As for the man who w as his father , Linda had nev er seen him again. His name w as Tomakin. (Y es, "Tho-mas" w as the D .H.C.'s first name.) He must ha ve flown a way, back to the Other Place, a way without her –a bad, unkind, unnatur al man."And so I w as born in Malpais," he concluded. "In Malpais." And he shook his head.The squalor of that little house on the outskirts of the pueblo!A space of dust and rubbish separ ated it from the village. T wo famine-strick en dogs were nosing obscenely in the garbage at its door . Inside, when they entered, the twilight stank and w as loud with flies."Linda!" the y oung man called.From the inner room a r ather hoarse female v oice said, "Coming."They w aited. In bowls on the floor were the remains of a meal, per-haps of sev eral meals.The door opened. A v ery stout blonde squa w stepped across the threshold and stood looking at the str angers staring incredulously , her mouth open. Lenina noticed with disgust that two of the front teeth were missing. And the colour of the ones that remained … She shud-dered. It w as worse than the old man. So fat. And all the lines in her face, the flabbiness, the wrinkles. And the sagging cheeks, with those purplish blotches. And the red v eins on her nose, the bloodshot ey es. And that neck –that neck; and the blank et she wore o ver her head–ragged and filth y. And under the brown sack -shaped tunic those enor-mous breasts, the bulge of the stomach, the hips. Oh, much worse than the old man, much worse! And suddenly the creature burst out in  a torrent of speech, rushed at her with outstretched arms and–F ord! Ford! it w as too rev olting, in another moment she'd be sick –pressed her against the bulge, the bosom, and began to kiss her . Ford! to kiss, slobberingly , and smelt too horrible, obviously nev er had a bath, and simply reek ed of that beastly stuff that w as put into Delta and Epsilon bottles (no , it wasn't true about Bernard), positiv ely stank of alcohol. She brok e away as quickly as she could.A blubbered and distorted face confronted her; the creature w as cry-ing."Oh, m y dear , my dear ." The torrent of words flowed sobbingly . "If y ou knew how glad– after all these y ears! A civiliz ed face. Y es, and civiliz ed clothes. Because I thought I should nev er see a piece of real acetate silk again." She fingered the sleev e of Lenina's shirt. The nails were black. "And those ador able viscose v elveteen shorts! Do y ou know , dear, I've still got m y old clothes, the ones I came in, put a way in a box. I'll show them y ou afterw ards. Though, of course, the acetate has  all gone into holes. But such a lo vely white bandolier –though I must say your green morocco is ev en lovelier. Not that it did me much good,  that bandolier ." Her tears began to flow again. "I suppose John told you. What I had to suffer –and not a gr amme of soma to be had. Only a drink of mescal every now and then, when P opé used to bring it. Popé is a bo y I used to know . But it mak es you feel so bad afterw ards. the mescal does, and y ou're sick with the peyotl; besides it alw ays made that a wful feeling of being ashamed much worse the next da y. And I w as so ashamed. Just think of it: me, a Beta–ha ving a bab y: put  yourself in m y place." (The mere suggestion made Lenina shudder .) "Though it w asn't m y fault, I swear; because I still don't know how it happened, seeing that I did all the Malthusian Drill– you know , by numbers, One, two , three, four , always, I swear it; but all the same it happened, and of course there w asn't an ything lik e an Abortion Centre  here. Is it still down in Chelsea, b y the w ay?" she ask ed. Lenina nod-ded. "And still floodlighted on T uesda ys and Frida ys?" Lenina nodded again. "That lo vely pink glass tower!" P oor Linda lifted her face and with closed ey es ecstatically contemplated the bright remembered im-age. "And the riv er at night," she whispered. Great tears ooz ed slowly out from behind her tight -shut ey elids. "And flying back in the ev ening from Stok e Poges. And then a hot bath and vibro- vacuum massage … But there." She drew a deep breath, shook her head, opened her ey es again, sniffed once or twice, then blew her nose on her fingers and wiped them on the skirt of her tunic. "Oh, I'm so sorry ," she said in re-sponse to Lenina's in voluntary grimace of disgust. "I oughtn't to ha ve done that. I'm sorry . But what are y ou to do when there aren't an y handk erchiefs? I remember how it used to upset me, all that dirt, and nothing being aseptic. I had an a wful cut on m y head when they first brought me here. Y ou can't imagine what they used to put on it. Filth, just filth. 'Civilization is Sterilization,' I used to sa y t them. And 'Streptocock -Gee to Banbury -T, to see a fine bathroom and W .C.' as though they were children. But of course they didn't understand. How should they? And in the end I suppose I got used to it. And an yhow, how can you keep things clean when there isn't hot w ater laid on? And  look at these clothes. This beastly wool isn't lik e acetate. It lasts and lasts. And y ou're supposed to mend it if it gets torn. But I'm a Beta; I worked in the F ertilizing R oom; nobody ev er taught me to do an ything like that. It w asn't m y business. Besides, it nev er used to be right to mend clothes. Throw them a way when they'v e got holes in them and buy new . 'The more stitches, the less riches.' Isn't that right? Mend-ing's anti-social. But it's all different here. It's lik e living with lunatics. Everything they do is mad." She look ed round; sa w John and Bernard had left them and were w alking up and down in the dust and garbage outside the house; but, none the less confidentially lowering her v oice, and leaning, while Lenina stiffened and shr ank, so close that the blown  reek of embry o-poison stirred the hair on her cheek. "F or instance," she hoarsely whispered, "tak e the w ay they ha ve one another here. Mad, I tell y ou, absolutely mad. Ev erybody belongs to ev ery one el-se–don't they? don't they?" she insisted, tugging at Lenina's sleev e. Lenina nodded her a verted head, let out the breath she had been hold-ing and managed to dr aw another one, relativ ely untainted. "W ell, here," the other went on, "nobody's supposed to belong to more than one person. And if y ou ha ve people in the ordinary w ay, the others think y ou're wick ed and anti-social. They hate and despise y ou. Once a  lot of women came and made a scene because their men came to see me. W ell, wh y not? And then they rushed at me … No , it was too a w-ful. I can't tell y ou about it." Linda co vered her face with her hands and shuddered. "They're so hateful, the women here. Mad, mad and cruel. And of course they don't know an ything about Malthusian Drill, or bottles, or decanting, or an ything of that sort. So they're ha ving children all the time–lik e dogs. It's too rev olting. And to think that I … Oh, F ord, F ord, F ord! And y et John was a great comfort to me. I don't know what I should ha ve done without him. Ev en though he did get so  upset whenev er a man … Quite as a tin y boy, even. Once (but that w as when he w as bigger) he tried to kill poor W aihusiw a–or w as it P opé?–just because I used to ha ve them sometimes. Because I nev er could make him understand that that w as what civiliz ed people ought to do . Being mad's infectious I believ e. Anyhow, John seems to ha ve caught it from the Indians. Because, of course, he w as with them a lot. Ev en though they alw ays were so beastly to him and wouldn't let him do all the things the other bo ys did. Which w as a good thing in a w ay, be-cause it made it easier for me to condition him a little. Though y ou've no idea how difficult that is. There's so much one doesn't know; it wasn't m y business to know . I mean, when a child asks y ou how a helicopter works or who made the world– well, what are y ou to answer if you're a Beta and ha ve always work ed in the F ertilizing R oom? What are you to answer?"Chapter EightOUTSIDE, in the dust and among the garbage (there were four dogs now), Bernard and John were w alking slowly up and down."So hard for me to realiz e," Bernard w as saying, "to reconstruct. As though we were living on different planets, in different centuries. A mother , and all this dirt, and gods, and old age, and disease …" He shook his head. "It's almost inconceiv able. I shall nev er understand, unless y ou explain.""Explain what?""This." He indicated the pueblo . "That." And it w as the little house out-side the village. "Ev erything. All y our life.""But what is there to sa y?""From the beginning. As far back as y ou can remember .""As far back as I can remember ." John frowned. There w as a long si-lence.It was very hot. They had eaten a lot of tortillas and sweet corn. Linda said, "Come and lie down, Bab y." They la y down together in the big bed. "Sing," and Linda sang. Sang "Streptocock -Gee to Banbury -T" and  "Bye Bab y Banting, soon y ou'll need decanting." Her v oice got fainter and fainter …There w as a loud noise, and he wok e with a start. A man w as saying something to Linda, and Linda w as laughing. She had pulled the blan-ket up to her chin, but the man pulled it down again. His hair w as like two black ropes, and round his arm w as a lo vely silv er bracelet with blue stones in it. He lik ed the br acelet; but all the same, he w as fright-ened; he hid his face against Linda's body . Linda put her hand on him and he felt safer . In those other words he did not understand so well, she said to the man, "Not with John here." The man look ed at him, then again at Linda, and said a few words in a soft v oice. Linda said, "No." But the man bent o ver the bed tow ards him and his face w as huge, terrible; the black ropes of hair touched the blank et. "No ," Linda  said again, and he felt her hand squeezing him more tightly . "No, no!" But the man took hold of one of his arms, and it hurt. He screamed. The man put up his other hand and lifted him up . Linda w as still hold-ing him, still sa ying, "No , no." The man said something short and an-gry, and suddenly her hands were gone. "Linda, Linda." He kick ed and wriggled; but the man carried him across to the door , opened it, put him down on the floor in the middle of the other room, and went a way, shutting the door behind him. He got up , he r an to the door . Standing on tiptoe he could just reach the big wooden latch. He lifted it and pushed; but the door wouldn't open. "Linda," he shouted. She didn't answer .He remembered a huge room, r ather dark; and there were big wooden  things with strings fastened to them, and lots of women standing round them–making blank ets, Linda said. Linda told him to sit in the corner with the other children, while she went and helped the women. He pla yed with the little bo ys for a long time. Suddenly people started talking v ery loud, and there were the women pushing Linda a way, and Linda w as crying. She went to the door and he r an after her . He ask ed her wh y they were angry . "Because I brok e something," she said. And then she got angry too . "How should I know how to do their beastly weaving?" she said. "Beastly sa vages." He ask ed her what sa vages were. When they got back to their house, P opé w as waiting at the door, and he came in with them. He had a big gourd full of stuff that looked lik e water; only it w asn't w ater, but something with a bad smell  that burnt y our mouth and made y ou cough. Linda dr ank some and Popé dr ank some, and then Linda laughed a lot and talk ed very loud; and then she and P opé went into the other room. When P opé went away, he went into the room. Linda w as in bed and so fast asleep that he couldn't w ake her.Popé used to come often. He said the stuff in the gourd w as called mescal; but Linda said it ought to be called soma; only it made y ou feel ill afterw ards. He hated P opé. He hated them all– all the men who came to see Linda. One afternoon, when he had been pla ying with the other children–it w as cold, he remembered, and there w as snow on the mountains–he came back to the house and heard angry v oices in the bedroom. They were women's v oices, and they said words he didn't understand, but he knew they were dreadful words. Then sud-denly, crash! something w as upset; he heard people mo ving about quickly , and there w as another cr ash and then a noise lik e hitting a mule, only not so bon y; then Linda screamed. "Oh, don't, don't, don't!" she said. He r an in. There were three women in dark blank ets. Linda w as on the bed. One of the women w as holding her wrists. An-other w as lying across her legs, so that she couldn't kick. The third was hitting her with a whip . Once, twice, three times; and each time Linda screamed. Crying, he tugged at the fringe of the woman's blan-ket. "Please, please." With her free hand she held him a way. The whip came down again, and again Linda screamed. He caught hold of the woman's enormous brown hand between his own and bit it with all his might. She cried out, wrenched her hand free, and ga ve him such a push that he fell down. While he w as lying on the ground she hit him three times with the whip . It hurt more than an ything he had ev er felt–like fire. The whip whistled again, fell. But this time it w as Linda who screamed."But wh y did they w ant to hurt y ou, Linda?'' he ask ed that night. He was crying, because the red marks of the whip on his back still hurt so terribly . But he w as also crying because people were so beastly and unfair , and because he w as only a little bo y and couldn't do an ything against them. Linda w as crying too . She w as grown up , but she w asn't big enough to fight against three of them. It w asn't fair for her either . "Why did they w ant to hurt y ou, Linda?""I don't know . How should I know?" It w as difficult to hear what she said, because she w as lying on her stomach and her face w as in the pillow . "They sa y those men are their men," she went on; and she did not seem to be talking to him at all; she seemed to be talking with some one inside herself . A long talk which she didn't understand; and in the end she started crying louder than ev er."Oh, don't cry , Linda. Don't cry ."He pressed himself against her . He put his arm round her neck. Linda cried out. "Oh, be careful. My shoulder! Oh!" and she pushed him away, hard. His head banged against the w all. "Little idiot!" she shouted; and then, suddenly , she began to slap him. Slap , slap …"Linda," he cried out. "Oh, mother , don't!""I'm not y our mother . I won't be y our mother .""But, Linda … Oh!" She slapped him on the cheek."Turned into a sa vage," she shouted. "Ha ving y oung ones lik e an ani-mal … If it hadn't been for y ou, I might ha ve gone to the Inspector , I might ha ve got a way. But not with a bab y. That would ha ve been too shameful."He sa w that she w as going to hit him again, and lifted his arm to guard  his face. "Oh, don't, Linda, please don't.""Little beast!" She pulled down his arm; his face w as unco vered."Don't, Linda." He shut his ey es, expecting the blow .But she didn't hit him. After a little time, he opened his ey es again and  saw that she w as looking at him. He tried to smile at her . Suddenly she  put her arms round him and kissed him again and again.Sometimes, for sev eral days, Linda didn't get up at all. She la y in bed and w as sad. Or else she dr ank the stuff that P opé brought and laughed a great deal and went to sleep . Sometimes she w as sick. Of-ten she forgot to w ash him, and there w as nothing to eat ex cept cold tortillas. He remembered the first time she found those little animals in  his hair , how she screamed and screamed.The happiest times were when she told him about the Other Place. "And y ou really can go flying, whenev er you lik e?""Whenev er you lik e." And she would tell him about the lo vely music that came out of a bo x, and all the nice games y ou could pla y, and the delicious things to eat and drink, and the light that came when y ou pressed a little thing in the w all, and the pictures that y ou could hear and feel and smell, as well as see, and another bo x for making nice smells, and the pink and green and blue and silv er houses as high as mountains, and ev erybody happ y and no one ev er sad or angry , and every one belonging to ev ery one else, and the bo xes where y ou could  see and hear what w as happening at the other side of the world, and babies in lo vely clean bottles–ev erything so clean, and no nast y smells, no dirt at all– and people nev er lonely , but living together and being so jolly and happ y, like the summer dances here in Malpais, but much happier , and the happiness being there ev ery da y, every da y. … He listened b y the hour . And sometimes, when he and the other chil-dren were tired with too much pla ying, one of the old men of the pueblo would talk to them, in those other words, of the great T rans-former of the W orld, and of the long fight between Right Hand and Left  Hand, between W et and Dry; of A wona wilona, who made a great fog by thinking in the night, and then made the whole world out of the fog; of Earth Mother and Sky F ather; of Ahaiyuta and Marsailema, the twins of W ar and Chance; of Jesus and P ookong; of Mary and Etsanat-lehi, the woman who mak es herself y oung again; of the Black Stone at  Laguna and the Great Eagle and Our Lady of Acoma. Str ange stories, all the more wonderful to him for being told in the other words and so not fully understood. L ying in bed, he would think of Hea ven and Lon-don and Our Lady of Acoma and the rows and rows of babies in clean bottles and Jesus flying up and Linda flying up and the great Director of World Hatcheries and A wona wilona.Lots of men came to see Linda. The bo ys began to point their fingers at him. In the str ange other words they said that Linda w as bad; they called her names he did not understand, but that he knew were bad names. One da y they sang a song about her , again and again. He threw stones at them. They threw back; a sharp stone cut his cheek. The blood wouldn't stop; he w as covered with blood.Linda taught him to read. With a piece of charcoal she drew pictures on the w all–an animal sitting down, a bab y inside a bottle; then she wrote letters. THE CA T IS ON THE MA T. THE T OT IS IN THE PO T. He learned quickly and easily . When he knew how to read all the words she wrote on the w all, Linda opened her big wooden bo x and pulled out from under those funn y little red trousers she nev er wore a thin lit-tle book. He had often seen it before. "When y ou're bigger ," she had said, "y ou can read it." W ell, now he w as big enough. He w as proud. "I'm afr aid you won't find it v ery ex citing," she said. "But it's the only thing I ha ve." She sighed. "If only y ou could see the lo vely reading machines we used to ha ve in London!" He began reading. The Chemi-cal and Bacteriological Conditioning of the Embryo. Practical Instruc-tions for Beta Embryo-Store Workers. It took him a quarter of an hour to read the title alone. He threw the book on the floor . "Beastly , beastly book!" he said, and began to cry .The bo ys still sang their horrible song about Linda. Sometimes, too , they laughed at him for being so r agged. When he tore his clothes, Linda did not know how to mend them. In the Other Place, she told him, people threw a way clothes with holes in them and got new ones. "Rags, r ags!" the bo ys used to shout at him. "But I can read," he said to himself , "and they can't. They don't ev en know what reading is." It was fairly easy , if he thought hard enough about the reading, to pre-tend that he didn't mind when they made fun of him. He ask ed Linda to giv e him the book again.The more the bo ys pointed and sang, the harder he read. Soon he could read all the words quite well. Ev en the longest. But what did they mean? He ask ed Linda; but ev en when she could answer it didn't seem to mak e it very clear , And gener ally she couldn't answer at all."What are chemicals?" he would ask."Oh, stuff lik e magnesium salts, and alcohol for k eeping the Deltas and  Epsilons small and backw ard, and calcium carbonate for bones, and all  that sort of thing.""But how do y ou mak e chemicals, Linda? Where do they come from?""Well, I don't know . You get them out of bottles. And when the bottles are empt y, you send up to the Chemical Store for more. It's the Chemical Store people who mak e them, I suppose. Or else they send to the factory for them. I don't know . I nev er did an y chemistry . My job w as alw ays with the embry os. It w as the same with ev erything else he ask ed about. Linda nev er seemed to know . The old men of the pueblo had much more definite answers."The seed of men and all creatures, the seed of the sun and the seed of earth and the seed of the sky –Awona wilona made them all out of the Fog of Increase. Now the world has four wombs; and he laid the seeds in the lowest of the four wombs. And gr adually the seeds began to grow …"One da y (John calculated later that it must ha ve been soon after his twelfth birthda y) he came home and found a book that he had nev er seen before lying on the floor in the bedroom. It w as a thick book and looked very old. The binding had been eaten b y mice; some of its pages were loose and crumpled. He pick ed it up , look ed at the title-page: the book w as called The Complete Works of William Shake-speare.Linda w as lying on the bed, sipping that horrible stinking mescal out of  a cup . "Popé brought it," she said. Her v oice w as thick and hoarse lik e somebody else's v oice. "It w as lying in one of the chests of the Ante-lope Kiv a. It's supposed to ha ve been there for hundreds of y ears. I expect it's true, because I look ed at it, and it seemed to be full of non-sense. Unciviliz ed. Still, it'll be good enough for y ou to pr actice y our reading on." She took a last sip , set the cup down on the floor beside the bed, turned o ver on her side, hiccoughed once or twice and went to sleep .He opened the book at r andom.Nay, but to liveIn the rank sweat of an enseamed bed,Stew'd in corruption, honeying and making loveOver the nasty sty …The str ange words rolled through his mind; rumbled, lik e talking thun-der; lik e the drums at the summer dances, if the drums could ha ve spoken; lik e the men singing the Corn Song, beautiful, beautiful, so that y ou cried; lik e old Mitsima sa ying magic o ver his feathers and his carved sticks and his bits of bone and stone–kiathla tsilu silokwe si-lokwe silokwe. Kiai silu silu, tsithl–but better than Mitsima's magic, be-cause it meant more, because it talk ed to him, talk ed wonderfully and only half -understandably , a terrible beautiful magic, about Linda; about Linda lying there snoring, with the empt y cup on the floor beside  the bed; about Linda and P opé, Linda and P opé.He hated P opé more and more. A man can smile and smile and be a villain. R emorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless villain. What did the words exactly mean? He only half knew . But their magic w as strong and went on rumbling in his head, and somehow it w as as though he had nev er really hated P opé before; nev er really hated him because he had nev er been able to sa y how much he hated him. But now he had these words, these words lik e drums and singing and magic. These words and the str ange, str ange story out of which they were tak en (he couldn't mak e head or tail of it, but it w as wonderful, wonderful all the same)–they ga ve him a reason for hating P opé; and they made his hatred more real; they ev en made P opé himself more real.One da y, when he came in from pla ying, the door of the inner room was open, and he sa w them lying together on the bed, asleep– white Linda and P opé almost black beside her , with one arm under her shoulders and the other dark hand on her breast, and one of the plaits  of his long hair lying across her throat, lik e a black snak e trying to strangle her . Popé's gourd and a cup were standing on the floor near the bed. Linda w as snoring.His heart seemed to ha ve disappeared and left a hole. He w as empt y. Empty, and cold, and r ather sick, and giddy . He leaned against the w all to steady himself . Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous … Lik e drums, like the men singing for the corn, lik e magic, the words repeated and repeated themselv es in his head. From being cold he w as suddenly hot. His cheeks burnt with the rush of blood, the room sw am and darkened before his ey es. He ground his teeth. "I'll kill him, I'll kill him, I'll kill him," he k ept sa ying. And suddenly there were more words.When he is drunk asleep, or in his rageOr in the incestuous pleasure of his bed …The magic w as on his side, the magic explained and ga ve orders. He stepped back in the outer room. "When he is drunk asleep …" The knife for the meat w as lying on the floor near the fireplace. He pick ed it up and tiptoed to the door again. "When he is drunk asleep , drunk asleep …" He r an across the room and stabbed–oh, the blood!–stabbed  again, as P opé hea ved out of his sleep , lifted his hand to stab once more, but found his wrist caught, held and–oh, oh!–twisted. He couldn't mo ve, he w as trapped, and there were P opé's small black eyes, very close, staring into his own. He look ed away. There were two  cuts on P opé's left shoulder . "Oh, look at the blood!" Linda w as crying. "Look at the blood!" She had nev er been able to bear the sight of blood. P opé lifted his other hand–to strik e him, he thought. He stiff-ened to receiv e the blow . But the hand only took him under the chin and turned his face, so that he had to look again into P opé's ey es. For a long time, for hours and hours. And suddenly –he couldn't help it –he began to cry . Popé burst out laughing. "Go ," he said, in the other In-dian words. "Go , my brave Ahaiyuta." He r an out into the other room to hide his tears."You are fifteen," said old Mitsima, in the Indian words. "Now I ma y teach y ou to work the cla y."Squatting b y the riv er, they work ed together ."First of all," said Mitsima, taking a lump of the wetted cla y between his hands, "we mak e a little moon." The old man squeez ed the lump into a disk, then bent up the edges, the moon became a shallow cup .Slowly and unskilfully he imitated the old man's delicate gestures."A moon, a cup , and now a snak e." Mitsima rolled out another piece of  clay into a long flexible cylinder , trooped it into a circle and pressed it on to the rim of the cup . "Then another snak e. And another . And an-other." Round b y round, Mitsima built up the sides of the pot; it w as narrow , it bulged, it narrowed again tow ards the neck. Mitsima squeez ed and patted, strok ed and scr aped; and there at last it stood, in shape the familiar w ater pot of Malpais, but cream y white instead of  black, and still soft to the touch. The crook ed parody of Mitsima's, his own stood beside it. Looking at the two pots, he had to laugh."But the next one will be better ," he said, and began to moisten an-other piece of cla y.To fashion, to giv e form, to feel his fingers gaining in skill and pow-er–this ga ve him an extr aordinary pleasure. "A, B , C, Vitamin D ," he sang to himself as he work ed. "The fat's in the liv er, the cod's in the sea." And Mitsima also sang– a song about killing a bear . They work ed all da y, and all da y he w as filled with an intense, absorbing happiness."Next winter ," said old Mitsima, "I will teach y ou to mak e the bow ."He stood for a long time outside the house, and at last the ceremonies  within were finished. The door opened; they came out. K othlu came first, his right hand out -stretched and tightly closed, as though o ver some precious jewel. Her clenched hand similarly outstretched, Kiakimé followed. They w alked in silence, and in silence, behind them, came the brothers and sisters and cousins and all the troop of old peo-ple.They w alked out of the pueblo , across the mesa. A t the edge of the cliff they halted, facing the early morning sun. K othlu opened his hand.  A pinch of corn meal la y white on the palm; he breathed on it, mur-mured a few words, then threw it, a handful of white dust, tow ards the  sun. Kiakimé did the same. Then Khakimé's father stepped forw ard, and holding up a feathered pr ayer stick, made a long pr ayer, then threw the stick after the corn meal."It is finished," said old Mitsima in a loud v oice. "They are married.""Well," said Linda, as they turned a way, "all I can sa y is, it does seem a lot of fuss to mak e about so little. In civiliz ed countries, when a bo y wants to ha ve a girl, he just … But where are you going, John?"He paid no attention to her calling, but r an on, a way, away, anywhere to be b y himself .It is finished Old Mitsima's words repeated themselv es in his mind. Finished, finished … In silence and from a long w ay off, but violently , desper ately, hopelessly , he had lo ved Kiakimé. And now it w as fin-ished. He w as sixteen.At the full moon, in the Antelope Kiv a, secrets would be told, secrets would be done and borne. They would go down, bo ys, into the kiv a and come out again, men. The bo ys were all afr aid and at the same time impatient. And at last it w as the da y. The sun went down, the moon rose. He went with the others. Men were standing, dark, at the entrance to the kiv a; the ladder went down into the red lighted depths.  Already the leading bo ys had begun to climb down. Suddenly , one of the men stepped forw ard, caught him b y the arm, and pulled him out of the r anks. He brok e free and dodged back into his place among the others. This time the man struck him, pulled his hair . "Not for y ou, white-hair!" "Not for the son of the she-dog," said one of the other men. The bo ys laughed. "Go!" And as he still ho vered on the fringes of  the group , "Go!" the men shouted again. One of them bent down, took  a stone, threw it. "Go , go, go!" There w as a shower of stones. Bleed-ing, he r an away into the darkness. From the red-lit kiv a came the noise of singing. The last of the bo ys had climbed down the ladder . He was all alone.All alone, outside the pueblo , on the bare plain of the mesa. The rock was like bleached bones in the moonlight. Down in the v alley, the coyotes were howling at the moon. The bruises hurt him, the cuts were still bleeding; but it w as not for pain that he sobbed; it w as be-cause he w as all alone, because he had been driv en out, alone, into this sk eleton world of rocks and moonlight. A t the edge of the preci-pice he sat down. The moon w as behind him; he look ed down into the black shadow of the mesa, into the black shadow of death. He had only to tak e one step , one little jump . … He held out his right hand in the moonlight. From the cut on his wrist the blood w as still oozing. Every few seconds a drop fell, dark, almost colourless in the dead light. Drop , drop , drop . To-morrow and to-morrow and to-morrow …He had disco vered Time and Death and God."Alone, alw ays alone," the y oung man w as saying.The words a woke a plaintiv e echo in Bernard's mind. Alone, alone … "So am I," he said, on a gush of confidingness. "T erribly alone.""Are y ou?" John look ed surprised. "I thought that in the Other Place … I mean, Linda alw ays said that nobody w as ev er alone there."Bernard blushed uncomfortably . "You see," he said, mumbling and with  averted ey es, "I'm r ather different from most people, I suppose. If one  happens to be decanted different …""Yes, that's just it." The y oung man nodded. "If one's different, one's bound to be lonely . They're beastly to one. Do y ou know , they shut me  out of absolutely ev erything? When the other bo ys were sent out to spend the night on the mountains– you know , when y ou ha ve to dream  which y our sacred animal is–they wouldn't let me go with the others; they wouldn't tell me an y of the secrets. I did it b y myself, though," he  added. "Didn't eat an ything for fiv e days and then went out one night alone into those mountains there." He pointed.Patronizingly , Bernard smiled. "And did y ou dream of an ything?" he asked.The other nodded. "But I mustn't tell y ou what." He w as silent for a lit-tle; then, in a low v oice, "Once," he went on, "I did something that none of the others did: I stood against a rock in the middle of the da y, in summer , with m y arms out, lik e Jesus on the Cross.""What on earth for?""I wanted to know what it w as like being crucified. Hanging there in the sun …""But wh y?""Why? Well …" He hesitated. "Because I felt I ought to . If Jesus could stand it. And then, if one has done something wrong … Besides, I w as unhapp y; that w as another reason.""It seems a funn y way of curing y our unhappiness," said Bernard. But on second thoughts he decided that there w as, after all, some sense in  it. Better than taking soma …"I fainted after a time," said the y oung man. "F ell down on m y face. Do you see the mark where I cut m yself?" He lifted the thick y ellow hair from his forehead. The scar showed, pale and puck ered, on his right temple.Bernard look ed, and then quickly , with a little shudder , averted his eyes. His conditioning had made him not so much pitiful as profoundly squeamish. The mere suggestion of illness or wounds w as to him not only horrif ying, but ev en repulsiv e and r ather disgusting. Lik e dirt, or deformit y, or old age. Hastily he changed the subject."I wonder if y ou'd lik e to come back to London with us?" he ask ed, making the first mo ve in a campaign whose str ategy he had been se-cretly elabor ating ev er since, in the little house, he had realiz ed who the "father" of this y oung sa vage must be. "W ould y ou lik e that?"The y oung man's face lit up . "Do y ou really mean it?""Of course; if I can get permission, that is.""Linda too?""Well …" He hesitated doubtfully . That rev olting creature! No , it was impossible. Unless, unless … It suddenly occurred to Bernard that her very rev oltingness might pro ve an enormous asset. "But of course!" he  cried, making up for his first hesitations with an ex cess of noisy cor-diality.The y oung man drew a deep breath. "T o think it should be coming true– what I'v e dreamt of all m y life. Do y ou remember what Mir anda says?""Who's Mir anda?"But the y oung man had evidently not heard the question. "O wonder!" he was saying; and his ey es shone, his face w as brightly flushed. "How  many goodly creatures are there here! How beauteous mankind is!" The flush suddenly deepened; he w as thinking of Lenina, of an angel in  bottle-green viscose, lustrous with y outh and skin food, plump , be-nevolently smiling. His v oice faltered. "O br ave new world," he began, then-suddenly interrupted himself; the blood had left his cheeks; he was as pale as paper ."Are y ou married to her?" he ask ed."Am I what?""Married. Y ou know –for ev er. They sa y 'for ev er' in the Indian words; it  can't be brok en.""Ford, no!" Bernard couldn't help laughing.John also laughed, but for another reason–laughed for pure jo y."O brave new world," he repeated. "O br ave new world that has such people in it. Let's start at once.""You ha ve a most peculiar w ay of talking sometimes," said Bernard, staring at the y oung man in perplex ed astonishment. "And, an yhow, hadn't y ou better w ait till y ou actually see the new world?"Chapter NineLENINA felt herself entitled, after this da y of queerness and horror , to a complete and absolute holida y. As soon as they got back to the rest -house, she sw allowed six half -gramme tablets of soma, lay down on her bed, and within ten minutes had embark ed for lunar eternit y. It would be eighteen hours at the least before she w as in time again.Bernard mean while la y pensiv e and wide-ey ed in the dark. It w as long after midnight before he fell asleep . Long after midnight; but his in-somnia had not been fruitless; he had a plan.Punctually , on the following morning, at ten o'clock, the green-uniformed octoroon stepped out of his helicopter . Bernard w as waiting for him among the aga ves."Miss Crowne's gone on soma-holida y," he explained. "Can hardly be back before fiv e. Which lea ves us sev en hours."He could fly to Santa Fé, do all the business he had to do , and be in Malpais again long before she wok e up."She'll be quite safe here b y herself ?""Safe as helicopters," the octoroon assured him.They climbed into the machine and started off at once. A t ten thirt y-four they landed on the roof of the Santa Fé P ost Office; at ten thirt y-seven Bernard had got through to the W orld Controller's Office in Whitehall; at ten thirt y-seven he w as speaking to his fordship's fourth personal secretary; at ten fort y-four he w as repeating his story to the first secretary , and at ten fort y-seven and a half it w as the deep , reso-nant v oice of Mustapha Mond himself that sounded in his ears."I ventured to think," stammered Bernard, "that y our fordship might find the matter of sufficient scientific interest …""Yes, I do find it of sufficient scientific interest," said the deep v oice. "Bring these two individuals back to London with y ou.""Your fordship is a ware that I shall need a special permit …""The necessary orders," said Mustapha Mond, "are being sent to the Warden of the R eserv ation at this moment. Y ou will proceed at once to the W arden's Office. Good-morning, Mr . Marx."There w as silence. Bernard hung up the receiv er and hurried up to the roof."Warden's Office," he said to the Gamma-green octoroon.At ten fift y-four Bernard w as shaking hands with the W arden."Delighted, Mr . Marx, delighted." His boom w as deferential. "W e have just receiv ed special orders …""I know ," said Bernard, interrupting him. "I w as talking to his fordship on the phone a moment ago ." His bored tone implied that he w as in the habit of talking to his fordship ev ery da y of the week. He dropped into a chair . "If y ou'll kindly tak e all the necessary steps as soon as possible. As soon as possible," he emphatically repeated. He w as thor-oughly enjo ying himself .At elev en three he had all the necessary papers in his pock et."So long," he said patronizingly to the W arden, who had accompanied him as far as the lift gates. "So long."He walked across to the hotel, had a bath, a vibro- vac massage, and an electrolytic sha ve, listened in to the morning's news, look ed in for half an hour on the televisor , ate a leisured luncheon, and at half -past two flew back with the octoroon to Malpais.The y oung man stood outside the rest -house."Bernard," he called. "Bernard!" There w as no answer .Noiseless on his deerksin moccasins, he r an up the steps and tried the door. The door w as lock ed.They were gone! Gone! It w as the most terrible thing that had ev er happened to him. She had ask ed him to come and see them, and now they were gone. He sat down on the steps and cried.Half an hour later it occurred to him to look through the window . The first thing he sa w was a green suit -case, with the initials L.C. painted on the lid. Jo y flared up lik e fire within him. He pick ed up a stone. The smashed glass tinkled on the floor . A moment later he w as inside the room. He opened the green suit -case; and all at once he w as breathing  Lenina's perfume, filling his lungs with her essential being. His heart beat wildly; for a moment he w as almost faint. Then, bending o ver the  precious bo x, he touched, he lifted into the light, he examined. The zippers on Lenina's spare pair of viscose v elveteen shorts were at first a puzzle, then solv ed, a delight. Zip , and then zip; zip , and then zip; he was enchanted. Her green slippers were the most beautiful things he had ev er seen. He unfolded a pair of zippicamiknicks, blushed, put them hastily a way again; but kissed a perfumed acetate handk erchief and wound a scarf round his neck. Opening a bo x, he spilt a cloud of scented powder . His hands were floury with the stuff . He wiped them on his chest, on his shoulders, on his bare arms. Delicious perfume! He  shut his ey es; he rubbed his cheek against his own powdered arm. Touch of smooth skin against his face, scent in his nostrils of musky dust–her real presence. "Lenina," he whispered. "Lenina!"A noise made him start, made him guiltily turn. He cr ammed up his thieveries into the suit -case and shut the lid; then listened again, looked. Not a sign of life, not a sound. And y et he had certainly heard something–something lik e a sigh, something lik e the creak of a board. He tiptoed to the door and, cautiously opening it, found himself looking  on to a broad landing. On the opposite side of the landing w as another  door, ajar. He stepped out, pushed, peeped.There, on a low bed, the sheet flung back, dressed in a pair of pink one-piece zipp yjamas, la y Lenina, fast asleep and so beautiful in the midst of her curls, so touchingly childish with her pink toes and her grave sleeping face, so trustful in the helplessness of her limp hands and melted limbs, that the tears came to his ey es.With an infinit y of quite unnecessary precautions–for nothing short of a  pistol shot could ha ve called Lenina back from her soma-holida y before  the appointed time–he entered the room, he knelt on the floor beside the bed. He gaz ed, he clasped his hands, his lips mo ved. "Her ey es," he murmured,"Her eyes, her hair, her cheek, her gait, her voice;Handlest in thy discourse O! that her hand,In whose comparison all whites are inkWriting their own reproach; to whose soft seizureThe cygnet's down is harsh …"A fly buzz ed round her; he w aved it a way. "Flies," he remembered,"On the white wonder of dear Juliet's hand, may seizeAnd steal immortal blessing from her lips,Who, even in pure and vestal modesty,Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin."Very slowly , with the hesitating gesture of one who reaches forw ard to stroke a sh y and possibly r ather dangerous bird, he put out his hand. It hung there trembling, within an inch of those limp fingers, on the verge of contact. Did he dare? Dare to profane with his un worthiest hand that … No , he didn't. The bird w as too dangerous. His hand dropped back. How beautiful she w as! How beautiful!Then suddenly he found himself reflecting that he had only to tak e hold of the zipper at her neck and giv e one long, strong pull … He shut  his ey es, he shook his head with the gesture of a dog shaking its ears as it emerges from the w ater. Detestable thought! He w as ashamed of himself . Pure and v estal modest y …There w as a humming in the air . Another fly trying to steal immortal blessings? A w asp? He look ed, sa w nothing. The humming grew louder  and louder , localiz ed itself as being outside the shuttered windows. The  plane! In a panic, he scr ambled to his feet and r an into the other room, v aulted through the open window , and hurrying along the path between the tall aga ves was in time to receiv e Bernard Marx as he climbed out of the helicopter .Chapter TenTHE HANDS of all the four thousand electric clocks in all the Blooms-bury Centre's four thousand rooms mark ed twent y-seven minutes past  two. "This hiv e of industry ," as the Director w as fond of calling it, w as in the full buzz of work. Ev ery one w as busy , everything in ordered motion. Under the microscopes, their long tails furiously lashing, spermatoz oa were burrowing head first into eggs; and, fertiliz ed, the eggs were expanding, dividing, or if bokano vskified, budding and breaking up into whole populations of separ ate embry os. From the So-cial Predestination R oom the escalators went rumbling down into the basement, and there, in the crimson darkness, stewingly w arm on their cushion of peritoneum and gorged with blood-surrogate and hormones, the foetuses grew and grew or , poisoned, languished into a stunted Epsilonhood. With a faint hum and r attle the mo ving r acks crawled imperceptibly through the weeks and the recapitulated aeons to where, in the Decanting R oom, the newly -unbottled babes uttered their first y ell of horror and amaz ement.The dynamos purred in the sub-basement, the lifts rushed up and down. On all the elev en floors of Nurseries it w as feeding time. From eighteen hundred bottles eighteen hundred carefully labelled infants were simultaneously sucking down their pint of pasteuriz ed external secretion.Above them, in ten successiv e layers of dormitory , the little bo ys and girls who were still y oung enough to need an afternoon sleep were as busy as ev ery one else, though they did not know it, listening uncon-sciously to h ypnopædic lessons in h ygiene and sociabilit y, in class-consciousness and the toddler's lo ve-life. Abo ve these again were the playrooms where, the weather ha ving turned to r ain, nine hundred older children were amusing themselv es with bricks and cla y model-ling, hunt -the-zipper , and erotic pla y.Buzz, buzz! the hiv e was humming, busily , joyfully. Blithe w as the singing of the y oung girls o ver their test -tubes, the Predestinators whistled as they work ed, and in the Decanting R oom what glorious jokes were cr acked abo ve the empt y bottles! But the Director's face, as he entered the F ertilizing R oom with Henry F oster, was grave, wooden with sev erity."A public example," he w as saying. "In this room, because it contains more high-caste work ers than an y other in the Centre. I ha ve told him to meet me here at half -past two .""He does his work v ery well," put in Henry , with h ypocritical generos-ity."I know . But that's all the more reason for sev erity. His intellectual eminence carries with it corresponding mor al responsibilities. The greater a man's talents, the greater his power to lead astr ay. It is bet-ter that one should suffer than that man y should be corrupted. Con-sider the matter dispassionately , Mr. Foster, and y ou will see that no offence is so heinous as unorthodo xy of beha viour. Murder kills only the individual– and, after all, what is an individual?" With a sweeping gesture he indicated the rows of microscopes, the test -tubes, the incu-bators. "W e can mak e a new one with the greatest ease– as man y as we lik e. Unorthodo xy threatens more than the life of a mere individual;  it strik es at Societ y itself . Yes, at Societ y itself ," he repeated. "Ah, but here he comes."Bernard had entered the room and w as adv ancing between the rows of  fertiliz ers tow ards them. A v eneer of jaunt y self -confidence thinly con-cealed his nerv ousness. The v oice in which he said, "Good-morning, Director ," was absurdly too loud; that in which, correcting his mistak e, he said, "Y ou ask ed me to come and speak to y ou here," ridiculously soft, a squeak."Yes, Mr . Marx," said the Director portentously . "I did ask y ou to come to me here. Y ou returned from y our holida y last night, I understand.""Yes," Bernard answered."Yes-s," repeated the Director , lingering, a serpent, on the "s." Then, suddenly r aising his v oice, "Ladies and gentlemen," he trumpeted, "la-dies and gentlemen."The singing of the girls o ver their test -tubes, the preoccupied whistling  of the Microscopists, suddenly ceased. There w as a profound silence; every one look ed round."Ladies and gentlemen," the Director repeated once more, "ex cuse me  for thus interrupting y our labours. A painful dut y constr ains me. The securit y and stabilit y of Societ y are in danger . Yes, in danger , ladies and gentlemen. This man," he pointed accusingly at Bernard, "this man who stands before y ou here, this Alpha-Plus to whom so much has been giv en, and from whom, in consequence, so much must be expected, this colleague of y ours–or should I anticipate and sa y this ex-colleague?–has grossly betr ayed the trust imposed in him. By his heretical views on sport and soma, by the scandalous unorthodo xy of his sex -life, b y his refusal to obey the teachings of Our F ord and be-have out of office hours, 'ev en as a little infant,'" (here the Director made the sign of the T), "he has pro ved himself an enem y of Societ y, a subv erter, ladies and gentlemen, of all Order and Stabilit y, a con-spirator against Civilization itself . For this reason I propose to dismiss him, to dismiss him with ignomin y from the post he has held in this Centre; I propose forth with to apply for his tr ansference to a Subcen-tre of the lowest order and, that his punishment ma y serv e the best interest of Societ y, as far as possible remo ved from an y important Centre of population. In Iceland he will ha ve small opportunit y to lead others astr ay by his unfordly example." The Director paused; then, folding his arms, he turned impressiv ely to Bernard. "Marx," he said, "can y ou show an y reason wh y I should not now ex ecute the judgment  passed upon y ou?""Yes, I can," Bernard answered in a v ery loud v oice.Somewhat tak en aback, but still majestically , "Then show it," said the Director ."Certainly . But it's in the passage. One moment." Bernard hurried to the door and threw it open. "Come in," he commanded, and the reason  came in and showed itself .There w as a gasp , a murmur of astonishment and horror; a y oung girl screamed; standing on a chair to get a better view some one upset two test -tubes full of spermatoz oa. Bloated, sagging, and among those  firm y outhful bodies, those undistorted faces, a str ange and terrif ying monster of middle- agedness, Linda adv anced into the room, coquet-tishly smiling her brok en and discoloured smile, and rolling as she walked, with what w as meant to be a v oluptuous undulation, her enormous haunches. Bernard w alked beside her ."There he is," he said, pointing at the Director ."Did y ou think I didn't recogniz e him?" Linda ask ed indignantly; then, turning to the Director , "Of course I knew y ou; Tomakin, I should ha ve known y ou an ywhere, among a thousand. But perhaps y ou've forgot-ten me. Don't y ou remember? Don't y ou remember , Tomakin? Y our Linda." She stood looking at him, her head on one side, still smiling, but with a smile that became progressiv ely, in face of the Director's expression of petrified disgust, less and less self -confident, that w a-vered and finally went out. "Don't y ou remember , Tomakin?" she re-peated in a v oice that trembled. Her ey es were anxious, agoniz ed. The  blotched and sagging face twisted grotesquely into the grimace of ex-treme grief . "Tomakin!" She held out her arms. Some one began to tit-ter."What's the meaning," began the Director , "of this monstrous …""Tomakin!" She r an forw ard, her blank et trailing behind her , threw her arms round his neck, hid her face on his chest.A howl of laughter went up irrepressibly ."… this monstrous pr actical jok e," the Director shouted.Red in the face, he tried to disengage himself from her embr ace. Des-perately she clung. "But I'm Linda, I'm Linda."' The laughter drowned her voice. "Y ou made me ha ve a bab y," she screamed abo ve the up-roar. There w as a sudden and appalling hush; ey es floated uncom-fortably , not knowing where to look. The Director went suddenly pale, stopped struggling and stood, his hands on her wrists, staring down at  her, horrified. "Y es, a bab y–and I w as its mother ." She flung the ob-scenit y like a challenge into the outr aged silence; then, suddenly breaking a way from him, ashamed, ashamed, co vered her face with her hands, sobbing. "It w asn't m y fault, T omakin. Because I alw ays did  my drill, didn't I? Didn't I? Alw ays … I don't know how … If y ou knew how a wful, T omakin … But he w as a comfort to me, all the same." Turning tow ards the door , "John!" she called. "John!"He came in at once, paused for a moment just inside the door , look ed round, then soft on his moccasined feet strode quickly across the room, fell on his knees in front of the Director , and said in a clear voice: "My father!"The word (for "father" w as not so much obscene as– with its connota-tion of something at one remo ve from the loathsomeness and mor al obliquit y of child-bearing–merely gross, a scatological r ather than a pornogr aphic impropriet y); the comically smutt y word reliev ed what had become a quite intoler able tension. Laughter brok e out, enor-mous, almost h ysterical, peal after peal, as though it would nev er stop. My father –and it w as the Director! My father! Oh F ord, oh F ord! That w as really too good. The whooping and the roaring renewed themselv es, faces seemed on the point of disintegr ation, tears were streaming. Six more test -tubes of spermatoz oa were upset. My father!Pale, wild-ey ed, the Director glared about him in an agon y of bewil-dered humiliation.My father! The laughter , which had shown signs of dying a way, brok e out again more loudly than ev er. He put his hands o ver his ears and rushed out of the room.Chapter ElevenAFTER the scene in the F ertilizing R oom, all upper -caste London w as wild to see this delicious creature who had fallen on his knees before the Director of Hatcheries and Conditioning–or r ather the ex -Director , for the poor man had resigned immediately afterw ards and nev er set foot inside the Centre again–had flopped down and called him (the joke was almost too good to be true!) "m y father ." Linda, on the con-trary, cut no ice; nobody had the smallest desire to see Linda. T o say one w as a mother –that w as past a jok e: it w as an obscenit y. Moreo ver, she w asn't a real sa vage, had been hatched out of a bottle and condi-tioned lik e any one else: so couldn't ha ve really quaint ideas. Final-ly–and this w as by far the strongest reason for people's not w anting to  see poor Linda–there w as her appear ance. F at; ha ving lost her y outh; with bad teeth, and a blotched complexion, and that figure (F ord!)– you simply couldn't look at her without feeling sick, y es, positiv ely sick. So the best people were quite determined not to see Linda. And Linda, for  her part, had no desire to see them. The return to civilization w as for her the return to soma, was the possibilit y of lying in bed and taking holida y after holida y, without ev er having to come back to a headache or a fit of v omiting, without ev er being made to feel as y ou alw ays felt after peyotl, as though y ou'd done something so shamefully anti-social  that y ou could nev er hold up y our head again. Soma played none of these unpleasant tricks. The holida y it ga ve was perfect and, if the morning after w as disagreeable, it w as so, not intrinsically , but only b y comparison with the jo ys of the holida y. The remedy w as to mak e the holida y continuous. Greedily she clamoured for ev er larger , ever more frequent doses. Dr . Shaw at first demurred; then let her ha ve what she  wanted. She took as much as twent y grammes a da y."Which will finish her off in a month or two ," the doctor confided to Bernard. "One da y the respir atory centre will be par alyzed. No more breathing. Finished. And a good thing too . If we could rejuv enate, of course it would be different. But we can't."Surprisingly , as ev ery one thought (for on soma-holida y Linda w as most con veniently out of the w ay), John r aised objections."But aren't y ou shortening her life b y giving her so much?""In one sense, y es," Dr . Shaw admitted. "But in another we're actually lengthening it." The y oung man stared, uncomprehending. "Soma may make you lose a few y ears in time," the doctor went on. "But think of the enormous, immeasur able dur ations it can giv e you out of time. Every soma-holida y is a bit of what our ancestors used to call eter-nity."John began to understand. "Eternit y was in our lips and ey es," he murmured."Eh?""Nothing.""Of course," Dr . Shaw went on, "y ou can't allow people to go popping off into eternit y if they'v e got an y serious work to do . But as she hasn't got an y serious work …""All the same," John persisted, "I don't believ e it's right."The doctor shrugged his shoulders. "W ell, of course, if y ou prefer to have her screaming mad all the time …"In the end John w as forced to giv e in. Linda got her soma. Thencefor-ward she remained in her little room on the thirt y-seventh floor of Bernard's apartment house, in bed, with the r adio and television al-ways on, and the patchouli tap just dripping, and the soma tablets within reach of her hand–there she remained; and y et wasn't there at all, w as all the time a way, infinitely far a way, on holida y; on holida y in some other world, where the music of the r adio w as a lab yrinth of so-norous colours, a sliding, palpitating lab yrinth, that led (b y what beau-tifully inevitable windings) to a bright centre of absolute con viction; where the dancing images of the television bo x were the performers in  some indescribably delicious all-singing feely; where the dripping patchouli w as more than scent –was the sun, w as a million sax ophones,  was Popé making lo ve, only much more so , incompar ably more, and without end."No, we can't rejuv enate. But I'm v ery glad," Dr . Shaw had concluded, "to ha ve had this opportunit y to see an example of senilit y in a human being. Thank y ou so much for calling me in." He shook Bernard w armly  by the hand.It was John, then, they were all after . And as it w as only through Ber-nard, his accredited guardian, that John could be seen, Bernard now found himself , for the first time in his life, treated not merely normally , but as a person of outstanding importance. There w as no more talk of the alcohol in his blood-surrogate, no gibes at his personal appear-ance. Henry F oster went out of his w ay to be friendly; Benito Hoo ver made him a present of six pack ets of sex -hormone chewing-gum; the Assistant Predestinator came out and cadged almost abjectly for an in-vitation to one of Bernard's ev ening parties. As for the women, Ber-nard had only to hint at the possibilit y of an in vitation, and he could have whichev er of them he lik ed."Bernard's ask ed me to meet the Sa vage next W ednesda y," Fanny an-nounced triumphantly ."I'm so glad," said Lenina. "And now y ou must admit that y ou were wrong about Bernard. Don't y ou think he's really r ather sweet?"Fanny nodded. "And I must sa y," she said, "I w as quite agreeably sur-prised."The Chief Bottler , the Director of Predestination, three Deput y Assis-tant F ertiliz er-Gener als, the Professor of F eelies in the College of Emo-tional Engineering, the Dean of the W estminster Communit y Singery , the Supervisor of Bokano vskification–the list of Bernard's notabilities was interminable."And I had six girls last week," he confided to Helmholtz W atson. "One on Monda y, two on T uesda y, two more on Frida y, and one on Saturda y. And if I'd had the time or the inclination, there were at least a doz en more who were only too anxious …"Helmholtz listened to his boastings in a silence so gloomily disappro v-ing that Bernard w as offended."You're en vious," he said.Helmholtz shook his head. "I'm r ather sad, that's all," he answered.Bernard went off in a huff . Nev er, he told himself , never would he speak to Helmholtz again.The da ys passed. Success went fizzily to Bernard's head, and in the process completely reconciled him (as an y good into xicant should do) to a world which, up till then, he had found v ery unsatisfactory . In so far as it recogniz ed him as important, the order of things w as good. But, reconciled b y his success, he y et refused to forego the privilege of  criticizing this order . For the act of criticizing heightened his sense of importance, made him feel larger . Moreo ver, he did genuinely believ e that there were things to criticiz e. (At the same time, he genuinely liked being a success and ha ving all the girls he w anted.) Before those who now , for the sak e of the Sa vage, paid their court to him, Bernard would par ade a carping unorthodo xy. He w as politely listened to . But behind his back people shook their heads. "That y oung man will come to a bad end," they said, prophesying the more confidently in that they  themselv es would in due course personally see to it that the end w as bad. "He won't find another Sa vage to help him out a second time," they said. Mean while, howev er, there w as the first Sa vage; they were polite. And because they were polite, Bernard felt positiv ely gigan-tic–gigantic and at the same time light with elation, lighter than air ."Lighter than air ," said Bernard, pointing upw ards.Like a pearl in the sky , high, high abo ve them, the W eather Depart-ment's captiv e balloon shone rosily in the sunshine."… the said Sa vage," so r an Bernard's instructions, "to be shown civi-lized life in all its aspects. …"He was being shown a bird's-ey e view of it at present, a bird's-ey e view from the platform of the Charing- T Tower. The Station Master and the R esident Meteorologist were acting as guides. But it w as Bernard who did most of the talking. Into xicated, he w as beha ving as though, at the v ery least, he were a visiting W orld Controller . Lighter than air .The Bomba y Green R ocket dropped out of the sky . The passengers alighted. Eight identical Dr avidian twins in khaki look ed out of the eight portholes of the cabin–the stew ards."Twelve hundred and fift y kilometres an hour ," said the Station Master impressiv ely. "What do y ou think of that, Mr . Savage?"John thought it v ery nice. "Still," he said, "Ariel could put a girdle round the earth in fort y minutes.""The Sa vage," wrote Bernard in his report to Mustapha Mond, "shows surprisingly little astonishment at, or a we of , civiliz ed inventions. This is partly due, no doubt, to the fact that he has heard them talk ed about b y the woman Linda, his m–––."(Mustapha Mond frowned. "Does the fool think I'm too squeamish to see the word written out at full length?")"Partly on his interest being focussed on what he calls 'the soul,' which  he persists in regarding as an entit y independent of the ph ysical en vi-ronment, whereas, as I tried to point out to him …"The Controller skipped the next sentences and w as just about to turn the page in search of something more interestingly concrete, when his eye was caught b y a series of quite extr aordinary phr ases. " … though I must admit," he read, "that I agree with the Sa vage in finding civi-lized infantilit y too easy or , as he puts it, not expensiv e enough; and I would lik e to tak e this opportunit y of dr awing y our fordship's attention to …"Mustapha Mond's anger ga ve place almost at once to mirth. The idea of this creature solemnly lecturing him–him-about the social order w as really too grotesque. The man must ha ve gone mad. "I ought to giv e him a lesson," he said to himself; then threw back his head and laughed aloud. F or the moment, at an y rate, the lesson would not be given.It was a small factory of lighting-sets for helicopters, a br anch of the Electrical Equipment Corpor ation. They were met on the roof itself (for that circular letter of recommendation from the Controller w as magical  in its effects) b y the Chief T echnician and the Human Element Man-ager. They w alked downstairs into the factory ."Each process," explained the Human Element Manager , "is carried out, so far as possible, b y a single Bokano vsky Group ."And, in effect, eight y-three almost noseless black br achycephalic Del-tas were cold-pressing. The fift y-six four -spindle chucking and turning machines were being manipulated b y fifty-six aquiline and ginger Gammas. One hundred and sev en heat -conditioned Epsilon Senegalese  were working in the foundry . Thirt y-three Delta females, long-headed, sandy , with narrow pelvises, and all within 20 millimetres of 1 metre 69 centimetres tall, were cutting screws. In the assembling room, the dynamos were being put together b y two sets of Gamma-Plus dw arfs. The two low work -tables faced one another; between them cr awled the  conveyor with its load of separ ate parts; fort y-seven blonde heads were confronted b y fort y-seven brown ones. F orty-seven snubs b y forty-seven hooks; fort y-seven receding b y fort y-seven prognathous chins. The completed mechanisms were inspected b y eighteen identi-cal curly auburn girls in Gamma green, pack ed in cr ates b y thirt y-four short-legged, left -handed male Delta-Minuses, and loaded into the waiting trucks and lorries b y sixt y-three blue-ey ed, flax en and freckled  Epsilon Semi-Morons."O brave new world …" By some malice of his memory the Sa vage found himself repeating Mir anda's words. "O br ave new world that has such people in it.""And I assure y ou," the Human Element Manager concluded, as they left the factory , "we hardly ev er have any trouble with our work ers. W e always find …"But the Sa vage had suddenly brok en away from his companions and was violently retching, behind a clump of laurels, as though the solid earth had been a helicopter in an air pock et."The Sa vage," wrote Bernard, "refuses to tak e soma, and seems much  distressed because of the woman Linda, his m–––, remains perma-nently on holida y. It is worth y of note that, in spite of his m–––'s senil-ity and the extreme repulsiv eness of her appear ance, the Sa vage fre-quently goes to see her and appears to be much attached to her –an interesting example of the w ay in which early conditioning can be made to modif y and ev en run counter to natur al impulses (in this case,  the impulse to recoil from an unpleasant object)."At Eton they alighted on the roof of Upper School. On the opposite side  of School Y ard, the fift y-two stories of Lupton's T ower gleamed white in  the sunshine. College on their left and, on their right, the School Communit y Singery reared their v enerable piles of ferro-concrete and vita-glass. In the centre of the quadr angle stood the quaint old chrome-steel statue of Our F ord.Dr. Gaffney , the Pro vost, and Miss K eate, the Head Mistress, receiv ed them as they stepped out of the plane."Do y ou ha ve man y twins here?" the Sa vage ask ed rather apprehen-sively, as they set out on their tour of inspection."Oh, no ," the Pro vost answered. "Eton is reserv ed ex clusiv ely for upper -caste bo ys and girls. One egg, one adult. It mak es education more difficult of course. But as they'll be called upon to tak e responsi-bilities and deal with unexpected emergencies, it can't be helped." He sighed.Bernard, mean while, had tak en a strong fancy to Miss K eate. "If y ou're free an y Monda y, Wednesda y, or Frida y evening," he w as saying. Jerk-ing his thumb tow ards the Sa vage, "He's curious, y ou know ," Bernard added. "Quaint."Miss K eate smiled (and her smile w as really charming, he thought); said Thank y ou; would be delighted to come to one of his parties. The Provost opened a door .Five minutes in that Alpha Double Plus classroom left John a trifle be-wildered."What is elementary relativit y?" he whispered to Bernard. Bernard tried to explain, then thought better of it and suggested that they should go to some other classroom.From behind a door in the corridor leading to the Beta-Minus geogr a-phy room, a ringing sopr ano v oice called, "One, two , three, four ," and then, with a weary impatience, "As y ou were.""Malthusian Drill," explained the Head Mistress. "Most of our girls are freemartins, of course. I'm a freemartin m yself." She smiled at Ber-nard. "But we ha ve about eight hundred unsteriliz ed ones who need constant drilling."In the Beta-Minus geogr aphy room John learnt that "a sa vage reserv a-tion is a place which, owing to unfa vourable climatic or geological con-ditions, or po verty of natur al resources, has not been worth the ex-pense of civilizing." A click; the room w as dark ened; and suddenly , on the screen abo ve the Master's head, there were the Penitentes of Acoma prostr ating themselv es before Our Lady , and w ailing as John had heard them w ail, confessing their sins before Jesus on the Cross, before the eagle image of P ookong. The y oung Etonians fairly shouted with laughter . Still w ailing, the Penitentes rose to their feet, stripped off their upper garments and, with knotted whips, began to beat them-selves, blow after blow . Redoubled, the laughter drowned ev en the amplified record of their groans."But wh y do they laugh?" ask ed the Sa vage in a pained bewilderment."Why?" The Pro vost turned tow ards him a still broadly grinning face. "Why? But because it's so extr aordinarily funn y."In the cinematogr aphic twilight, Bernard risk ed a gesture which, in the  past, ev en total darkness would hardly ha ve emboldened him to mak e. Strong in his new importance, he put his arm around the Head Mis-tress's w aist. It yielded, willowily . He w as just about to snatch a kiss or  two and perhaps a gentle pinch, when the shutters click ed open again."Perhaps we had better go on," said Miss K eate, and mo ved tow ards the door ."And this," said the Pro vost a moment later , "is Hypnopædic Control Room."Hundreds of synthetic music bo xes, one for each dormitory , stood ranged in shelv es round three sides of the room; pigeon-holed on the fourth were the paper sound-tr ack rolls on which the v arious h yp-nopædic lessons were printed."You slip the roll in here," explained Bernard, interrupting Dr . Gaffney , "press down this switch …""No, that one," corrected the Pro vost, anno yed."That one, then. The roll un winds. The selenium cells tr ansform the light impulses into sound w aves, and …""And there y ou are," Dr . Gaffney concluded."Do they read Shak espeare?" ask ed the Sa vage as they w alked, on their w ay to the Bio-chemical Labor atories, past the School Libr ary."Certainly not," said the Head Mistress, blushing."Our libr ary," said Dr . Gaffney , "contains only books of reference. If our  young people need distr action, they can get it at the feelies. W e don't encour age them to indulge in an y solitary amusements."Five bus-loads of bo ys and girls, singing or in a silent embr acement, rolled past them o ver the vitrified high way."Just returned," explained Dr . Gaffney , while Bernard, whispering, made an appointment with the Head Mistress for that v ery ev ening, "from the Slough Crematorium. Death conditioning begins at eighteen months. Ev ery tot spends two mornings a week in a Hospital for the Dying. All the best to ys are k ept there, and they get chocolate cream on death da ys. They learn to tak e dying as a matter of course.""Like any other ph ysiological process," put in the Head Mistress pro-fessionally .Eight o'clock at the Sa voy. It w as all arr anged.On their w ay back to London they stopped at the T elevision Corpor a-tion's factory at Brentford."Do y ou mind w aiting here a moment while I go and telephone?" ask ed Bernard.The Sa vage w aited and w atched. The Main Da y-Shift w as just going off  duty. Crowds of lower -caste work ers were queued up in front of the monor ail station-sev en or eight hundred Gamma, Delta and Epsilon men and women, with not more than a doz en faces and statures be-tween them. T o each of them, with his or her tick et, the booking clerk pushed o ver a little cardboard pillbo x. The long caterpillar of men and women mo ved slowly forw ard."What's in those" (remembering The Merchant of Venice) "those cas-kets?" the Sa vage enquired when Bernard had rejoined him."The da y's soma ration," Bernard answered r ather indistinctly; for he was masticating a piece of Benito Hoo ver's chewing-gum. "They get it after their work's o ver. Four half -gramme tablets. Six on Saturda ys."He took John's arm affectionately and they w alked back tow ards the helicopter .Lenina came singing into the Changing R oom."You seem v ery pleased with y ourself ," said F anny."I am pleased," she answered. Zip! "Bernard r ang up half an hour ago." Zip , zip! She stepped out of her shorts. "He has an unexpected engagement." Zip! "Ask ed me if I'd tak e the Sa vage to the feelies this evening. I must fly ." She hurried a way tow ards the bathroom."She's a lucky girl," F anny said to herself as she w atched Lenina go .There w as no en vy in the comment; good-natured F anny was merely stating a fact. Lenina w as lucky; lucky in ha ving shared with Bernard a  generous portion of the Sa vage's immense celebrit y, lucky in reflecting  from her insignificant person the moment's supremely fashionable glory. Had not the Secretary of the Y oung W omen's F ordian Association  asked her to giv e a lecture about her experiences? Had she not been invited to the Annual Dinner of the Aphroditeum Club? Had she not al-ready appeared in the F eelytone News– visibly , audibly and tactually appeared to countless millions all o ver the planet?Hardly less flattering had been the attentions paid her b y conspicuous individuals. The R esident W orld Controller's Second Secretary had asked her to dinner and breakfast. She had spent one week -end with the Ford Chief -Justice, and another with the Arch-Communit y-Songster  of Canterbury . The President of the Internal and External Secretions Corpor ation w as perpetually on the phone, and she had been to Deau-ville with the Deput y-Governor of the Bank of Europe."It's wonderful, of course. And y et in a w ay," she had confessed to Fanny, "I feel as though I were getting something on false pretences. Because, of course, the first thing they all w ant to know is what it's like to mak e love to a Sa vage. And I ha ve to sa y I don't know ." She shook her head. "Most of the men don't believ e me, of course. But it's true. I wish it weren't," she added sadly and sighed. "He's terribly good-looking; don't y ou think so?""But doesn't he lik e you?" ask ed Fanny."Sometimes I think he does and sometimes I think he doesn't. He al-ways does his best to a void me; goes out of the room when I come in;  won't touch me; won't ev en look at me. But sometimes if I turn round suddenly , I catch him staring; and then– well, y ou know how men look when they lik e you."Yes, Fanny knew ."I can't mak e it out," said Lenina.She couldn't mak e it out; and not only w as bewildered; w as also rather upset."Because, y ou see, F anny, I like him."Liked him more and more. W ell, now there'd be a real chance, she thought, as she scented herself after her bath. Dab , dab, dab– a real chance. Her high spirits o verflowed in a song.''Hug me till you drug me, honey;Kiss me till I'm in a coma;Hug me, honey, snuggly bunny;Love's as good as soma."The scent organ w as pla ying a delightfully refreshing Herbal Capric-cio–rippling arpeggios of th yme and la vender , of rosemary , basil, m yr-tle, tarr agon; a series of daring modulations through the spice k eys into ambergris; and a slow return through sandalwood, camphor , cedar  and newmown ha y (with occasional subtle touches of discord– a whiff of kidney pudding, the faintest suspicion of pig's dung) back to the simple aromatics with which the piece began. The final blast of th yme died a way; there w as a round of applause; the lights went up . In the synthetic music machine the sound-tr ack roll began to un wind. It w as a trio for h yper-violin, super -cello and oboe-surrogate that now filled the air with its agreeable languor . Thirt y or fort y bars– and then, against this instrumental background, a much more than human v oice began to w arble; now throat y, now from the head, now hollow as a flute, now charged with y earning harmonics, it effortlessly passed from  Gaspard's F orster's low record on the v ery frontiers of musical tone to a trilled bat -note high abo ve the highest C to which (in 1770, at the Ducal oper a of P arma, and to the astonishment of Mozart) Lucrezia Ajugari, alone of all the singers in history , once piercingly ga ve utter-ance.Sunk in their pneumatic stalls, Lenina and the Sa vage sniffed and lis-tened. It w as now the turn also for ey es and skin.The house lights went down; fiery letters stood out solid and as though  self-supported in the darkness. THREE WEEKS IN A HELICOPTER . AN ALL-SUPER -SINGING, SYNTHETIC -TALK1NG, COL OURED , STEREO-SCOPIC FEEL Y. WITH SYNCHRONIZED SCENT -ORGAN ACCOMP ANI-MENT ."Take hold of those metal knobs on the arms of y our chair ," whispered Lenina. "Otherwise y ou won't get an y of the feely effects."The Sa vage did as he w as told.Those fiery letters, mean while, had disappeared; there were ten sec-onds of complete darkness; then suddenly , dazzling and incompar ably more solid-looking than they would ha ve seemed in actual flesh and blood, far more real than realit y, there stood the stereoscopic images, locked in one another's arms, of a gigantic negro and a golden-haired young br achycephalic Beta-Plus female.The Sa vage started. That sensation on his lips! He lifted a hand to his mouth; the titillation ceased; let his hand fall back on the metal knob; it began again. The scent organ, mean while, breathed pure musk. Ex-piringly , a sound-tr ack super -dove cooed "Oo-ooh"; and vibr ating only thirty-two times a second, a deeper than African bass made answer: "Aa-aah." "Ooh- ah! Ooh- ah!" the stereoscopic lips came together again, and once more the facial erogenous z ones of the six thousand spectators in the Alhambr a tingled with almost intoler able galv anic pleasure. "Ooh …"The plot of the film w as extremely simple. A few minutes after the first  Oohs and Aahs (a duet ha ving been sung and a little lo ve made on that famous bearskin, ev ery hair of which–the Assistant Predestinator was perfectly right –could be separ ately and distinctly felt), the negro had a helicopter accident, fell on his head. Thump! what a twinge through the forehead! A chorus of ow's and aie's went up from the audience.The concussion knock ed all the negro's conditioning into a cock ed hat. He dev eloped for the Beta blonde an ex clusiv e and maniacal passion. She protested. He persisted. There were struggles, pursuits, an assault  on a riv al, finally a sensational kidnapping. The Beta blond w as rav-ished a way into the sky and k ept there, ho vering, for three weeks in a wildly anti-social tête-à-tête with the black madman. Finally , after a whole series of adv entures and much aerial acrobacy three handsome young Alphas succeeded in rescuing her . The negro w as pack ed off to an Adult R e-conditioning Centre and the film ended happily and deco-rously , with the Beta blonde becoming the mistress of all her three rescuers. They interrupted themselv es for a moment to sing a syn-thetic quartet, with full super -orchestr al accompaniment and gardenias  on the scent organ. Then the bearskin made a final appear ance and, amid a blare of sax ophones, the last stereoscopic kiss faded into dark-ness, the last electric titillation died on the lips lik e a dying moth that quivers, quiv ers, ev er more feebly , ever more faintly , and at last is quiet, quite still.But for Lenina the moth did not completely die. Ev en after the lights had gone up , while they were shuffling slowly along with the crowd towards the lifts, its ghost still fluttered against her lips, still tr aced fine shuddering roads of anxiet y and pleasure across her skin. Her cheeks were flushed. She caught hold of the Sa vage's arm and pressed it, limp , against her side. He look ed down at her for a mo-ment, pale, pained, desiring, and ashamed of his desire. He w as not worth y, not … Their ey es for a moment met. What treasures hers promised! A queen's r ansom of temper ament. Hastily he look ed away, disengaged his imprisoned arm. He w as obscurely terrified lest she should cease to be something he could feel himself un worth y of."I don't think y ou ought to see things lik e that," he said, making haste to transfer from Lenina herself to the surrounding circumstances the blame for an y past or possible future lapse from perfection."Things lik e what, John?""Like this horrible film.""Horrible?" Lenina w as genuinely astonished. "But I thought it w as lovely.""It was base," he said indignantly , "it w as ignoble."She shook her head. "I don't know what y ou mean." Wh y was he so queer? Wh y did he go out of his w ay to spoil things?In the taxicopter he hardly ev en look ed at her . Bound b y strong v ows that had nev er been pronounced, obedient to la ws that had long since ceased to run, he sat a verted and in silence. Sometimes, as though a finger had pluck ed at some taut, almost breaking string, his whole body would shak e with a sudden nerv ous start.The taxicopter landed on the roof of Lenina's apartment house. "A t last," she thought exultantly as she stepped out of the cab . At last–even though he had been so queer just now . Standing under a lamp , she peered into her hand mirror . At last. Y es, her nose w as a bit shin y. She shook the loose powder from her puff . While he w as pa ying off the  taxi–there would just be time. She rubbed at the shininess, thinking: "He's terribly good-looking. No need for him to be sh y like Bernard. And y et … An y other man would ha ve done it long ago . Well, now at last." That fr agment of a face in the little round mirror suddenly smiled  at her ."Good-night," said a str angled v oice behind her . Lenina wheeled round.  He was standing in the doorw ay of the cab , his ey es fix ed, staring; had  evidently been staring all this time while she w as powdering her nose, waiting–but what for? or hesitating, trying to mak e up his mind, and all the time thinking, thinking–she could not imagine what extr aordi-nary thoughts. "Good-night, Lenina," he repeated, and made a str ange grimacing attempt to smile."But, John … I thought y ou were … I mean, aren't y ou? …"He shut the door and bent forw ard to sa y something to the driv er. The cab shot up into the air .Looking down through the window in the floor , the Sa vage could see Lenina's upturned face, pale in the bluish light of the lamps. The mouth w as open, she w as calling. Her foreshortened figure rushed away from him; the diminishing square of the roof seemed to be falling  through the darkness.Five minutes later he w as back in his room. From its hiding-place he took out his mouse-nibbled v olume, turned with religious care its stained and crumbled pages, and began to read Othello. Othello , he remembered, w as like the hero of Three Weeks in a Helicopter–a black  man.Drying her ey es, Lenina w alked across the roof to the lift. On her w ay down to the twent y-seventh floor she pulled out her soma bottle. One gramme, she decided, would not be enough; hers had been more than  a one-gr amme affliction. But if she took two gr ammes, she r an the risk  of not w aking up in time to-morrow morning. She compromised and, into her cupped left palm, shook out three half -gramme tablets.Chapter TwelveBERNARD had to shout through the lock ed door; the Sa vage would not  open."But ev erybody's there, w aiting for y ou.""Let them w ait," came back the muffled v oice through the door ."But y ou know quite well, John" (how difficult it is to sound persuasiv e at the top of one's v oice!) "I ask ed them on purpose to meet y ou.""You ought to ha ve ask ed me first whether I w anted to meet them.""But y ou alw ays came before, John.""That's precisely wh y I don't w ant to come again.""Just to please me," Bernard bellowingly wheedled. "W on't y ou come to please me?""No.""Do y ou seriously mean it?""Yes."Despairingly , "But what shall I do?" Bernard w ailed."Go to hell!" ba wled the exasper ated v oice from within."But the Arch-Communit y-Songster of Canterbury is there to-night." Bernard w as almost in tears."Ai yaa tákwa!" It was only in Zuñi that the Sa vage could adequately express what he felt about the Arch-Communit y-Songster . "Háni!" he added as an after -thought; and then (with what derisiv e ferocit y!): "Sons éso tse-ná." And he spat on the ground, as P opé might ha ve done.In the end Bernard had to slink back, diminished, to his rooms and in-form the impatient assembly that the Sa vage would not be appearing that ev ening. The news w as receiv ed with indignation. The men were furious at ha ving been trick ed into beha ving politely to this insignifi-cant fellow with the unsa voury reputation and the heretical opinions. The higher their position in the hier archy, the deeper their resentment."To play such a jok e on me," the Arch- Songster k ept repeating, "on me!"As for the women, they indignantly felt that they had been had on false pretences–had b y a wretched little man who had had alcohol poured into his bottle b y mistak e–by a creature with a Gamma-Minus physique. It w as an outr age, and they said so , more and more loudly . The Head Mistress of Eton w as particularly scathing.Lenina alone said nothing. P ale, her blue ey es clouded with an un-wonted melancholy , she sat in a corner , cut off from those who sur-rounded her b y an emotion which they did not share. She had come to  the part y filled with a str ange feeling of anxious exultation. "In a few minutes," she had said to herself , as she entered the room, "I shall be seeing him, talking to him, telling him" (for she had come with her mind made up) "that I lik e him–more than an ybody I'v e ever known. And then perhaps he'll sa y …"What would he sa y? The blood had rushed to her cheeks."Why was he so str ange the other night, after the feelies? So queer . And y et I'm absolutely sure he really does r ather lik e me. I'm sure …"It was at this moment that Bernard had made his announcement; the Savage w asn't coming to the part y.Lenina suddenly felt all the sensations normally experienced at the be-ginning of a Violent P assion Surrogate treatment –a sense of dreadful emptiness, a breathless apprehension, a nausea. Her heart seemed to stop beating."Perhaps it's because he doesn't lik e me," she said to herself . And at once this possibilit y became an established certaint y: John had refused  to come because he didn't lik e her. He didn't lik e her. …"It really is a bit too thick," the Head Mistress of Eton w as saying to the Director of Crematoria and Phosphorus R eclamation. "When I think  that I actually …""Yes," came the v oice of F anny Crowne, "it's absolutely true about the alcohol. Some one I know knew some one who w as working in the Embry o Store at the time. She said to m y friend, and m y friend said to  me …""Too bad, too bad," said Henry F oster, sympathizing with the Arch-Communit y-Songster . "It ma y interest y ou to know that our ex -Director w as on the point of tr ansferring him to Iceland."Pierced b y every word that w as spok en, the tight balloon of Bernard's happy self -confidence w as leaking from a thousand wounds. P ale, dis-traught, abject and agitated, he mo ved among his guests, stammering  incoherent apologies, assuring them that next time the Sa vage would certainly be there, begging them to sit down and tak e a carotene sandwich, a slice of vitamin A pâté, a glass of champagne-surrogate. They duly ate, but ignored him; dr ank and were either rude to his face  or talk ed to one another about him, loudly and offensiv ely, as though he had not been there."And now , my friends," said the Arch-Communit y-Songster of Canter-bury, in that beautiful ringing v oice with which he led the proceedings at Ford's Da y Celebr ations, "Now , my friends, I think perhaps the time has come …" He rose, put down his glass, brushed from his purple vis-cose w aistcoat the crumbs of a consider able collation, and w alked to-wards the door .Bernard darted forw ard to intercept him."Must y ou really , Arch- Songster? … It's v ery early still. I'd hoped y ou would …"Yes, what hadn't he hoped, when Lenina confidentially told him that the Arch-Communit y-Songster would accept an in vitation if it were sent. "He's really r ather sweet, y ou know ." And she had shown Ber-nard the little golden zipper -fastening in the form of a T which the Arch- Songster had giv en her as a memento of the week -end she had spent at Lambeth. To meet the Arch-Community-Songster of Canter-bury and Mr. Savage. Bernard had proclaimed his triumph on ev ery in-vitation card. But the Sa vage had chosen this ev ening of all ev enings to lock himself up in his room, to shout "Háni!" and ev en (it w as lucky that Bernard didn't understand Zuñi) "Sons éso tse-ná!" What should have been the crowning moment of Bernard's whole career had turned  out to be the moment of his greatest humiliation."I'd so much hoped …" he stammeringly repeated, looking up at the great dignitary with pleading and distr acted ey es."My y oung friend," said the Arch-Communit y-Songster in a tone of loud and solemn sev erity; there w as a gener al silence. "Let me giv e you a word of advice." He w agged his finger at Bernard. "Before it's too late. A word of good advice." (His v oice became sepulchr al.) "Mend  your w ays, m y young friend, mend y our w ays." He made the sign of the T o ver him and turned a way. "Lenina, m y dear ," he called in an-other tone. "Come with me."Obediently , but unsmiling and (wholly insensible of the honour done to  her) without elation, Lenina w alked after him, out of the room. The other guests followed at a respectful interv al. The last of them slammed the door . Bernard w as all alone.Punctured, utterly deflated, he dropped into a chair and, co vering his face with his hands, began to weep . A few minutes later , howev er, he thought better of it and took four tablets of soma.Upstairs in his room the Sa vage w as reading Romeo and Juliet.Lenina and the Arch-Communit y-Songster stepped out on to the roof of Lambeth P alace. "Hurry up , my young friend– I mean, Lenina," called the Arch- Songster impatiently from the lift gates. Lenina, who had lingered for a moment to look at the moon, dropped her ey es and came hurrying across the roof to rejoin him."A New Theory of Biology" w as the title of the paper which Mustapha Mond had just finished reading. He sat for some time, meditativ ely frowning, then pick ed up his pen and wrote across the title-page: "The  author's mathematical treatment of the conception of purpose is no vel and highly ingenious, but heretical and, so far as the present social or-der is concerned, dangerous and potentially subv ersive. Not to be pub-lished." He underlined the words. "The author will be k ept under su-pervision. His tr ansference to the Marine Biological Station of St. He-lena ma y become necessary ." A pit y, he thought, as he signed his name. It w as a masterly piece of work. But once y ou began admitting explanations in terms of purpose– well, y ou didn't know what the result  might be. It w as the sort of idea that might easily decondition the more unsettled minds among the higher castes–mak e them lose their faith in happiness as the So vereign Good and tak e to believing, in-stead, that the goal w as somewhere bey ond, somewhere outside the present human sphere, that the purpose of life w as not the mainte-nance of well-being, but some intensification and refining of con-sciousness, some enlargement of knowledge. Which w as, the Control-ler reflected, quite possibly true. But not, in the present circumstance, admissible. He pick ed up his pen again, and under the words "Not to be published" drew a second line, thick er and black er than the first; then sighed, "What fun it would be," he thought, "if one didn't ha ve to think about happiness!"With closed ey es, his face shining with r apture, John w as softly de-claiming to v acancy:"Oh! she doth teach the torches to burn bright.It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night,Like a rich jewel in an Ethiop's ear;Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear …"The golden T la y shining on Lenina's bosom. Sportiv ely, the Arch-Communit y-Songster caught hold of it, sportiv ely he pulled, pulled. "I think," said Lenina suddenly , breaking a long silence, "I'd better tak e a couple of gr ammes of soma."Bernard, b y this time, w as fast asleep and smiling at the priv ate par a-dise of his dreams. Smiling, smiling. But inex orably, every thirt y sec-onds, the minute hand of the electric clock abo ve his bed jumped for-ward with an almost imperceptible click. Click, click, click, click … And it was morning. Bernard w as back among the miseries of space and time. It w as in the lowest spirits that he taxied across to his work at the Conditioning Centre. The into xication of success had ev aporated; he was soberly his old self; and b y contr ast with the tempor ary balloon  of these last weeks, the old self seemed unprecedentedly hea vier than the surrounding atmosphere.To this deflated Bernard the Sa vage showed himself unexpectedly sympathetic."You're more lik e what y ou were at Malpais," he said, when Bernard had told him his plaintiv e story . "Do y ou remember when we first talked together? Outside the little house. Y ou're lik e what y ou were then.""Because I'm unhapp y again; that's wh y.""Well, I'd r ather be unhapp y than ha ve the sort of false, lying happi-ness y ou were ha ving here.""I like that," said Bernard bitterly . "When it's y ou who were the cause of it all. R efusing to come to m y part y and so turning them all against me!" He knew that what he w as saying w as absurd in its injustice; he admitted in wardly, and at last ev en aloud, the truth of all that the Savage now said about the worthlessness of friends who could be turned upon so slight a pro vocation into persecuting enemies. But in spite of this knowledge and these admissions, in spite of the fact that his friend's support and sympath y were now his only comfort, Bernard continued perv ersely to nourish, along with his quite genuine affection,  a secret griev ance against the Sa vage, to mediate a campaign of small  revenges to be wreak ed upon him. Nourishing a griev ance against the Arch-Communit y-Songster w as useless; there w as no possibilit y of be-ing rev enged on the Chief Bottler or the Assistant Predestinator . As a victim, the Sa vage possessed, for Bernard, this enormous superiorit y over the others: that he w as accessible. One of the principal functions of a friend is to suffer (in a milder and symbolic form) the punishments  that we should lik e, but are unable, to inflict upon our enemies.Bernard's other victim-friend w as Helmholtz. When, discomfited, he came and ask ed once more for the friendship which, in his prosperit y, he had not thought it worth his while to preserv e. Helmholtz ga ve it; and ga ve it without a reproach, without a comment, as though he had forgotten that there had ev er been a quarrel. T ouched, Bernard felt himself at the same time humiliated b y this magnanimit y–a magna-nimity the more extr aordinary and therefore the more humiliating in that it owed nothing to soma and ev erything to Helmholtz's char acter. It was the Helmholtz of daily life who forgot and forga ve, not the Helmholtz of a half -gramme holida y. Bernard w as duly gr ateful (it w as an enormous comfort to ha ve his friend again) and also duly resentful (it would be pleasure to tak e some rev enge on Helmholtz for his gen-erosit y).At their first meeting after the estr angement, Bernard poured out the tale of his miseries and accepted consolation. It w as not till some da ys later that he learned, to his surprise and with a twinge of shame, that he was not the only one who had been in trouble. Helmholtz had also come into conflict with A uthorit y."It was over some rh ymes," he explained. "I w as giving m y usual course of Adv anced Emotional Engineering for Third Y ear Students. Twelve lectures, of which the sev enth is about rh ymes. 'On the Use of Rhymes in Mor al Propaganda and Adv ertisement,' to be precise. I al-ways illustr ate m y lecture with a lot of technical examples. This time I thought I'd giv e them one I'd just written m yself. Pure madness, of course; but I couldn't resist it." He laughed. "I w as curious to see what  their reactions would be. Besides," he added more gr avely, "I w anted to do a bit of propaganda; I w as trying to engineer them into feeling as I'd felt when I wrote the rh ymes. F ord!" He laughed again. "What an outcry there w as! The Principal had me up and threatened to hand me the immediate sack. l'm a mark ed man.""But what were y our rh ymes?" Bernard ask ed."They were about being alone."Bernard's ey ebrows went up ."I'll recite them to y ou, if y ou lik e." And Helmholtz began:"Yesterday's committee,Sticks, but a broken drum,Midnight in the City,Flutes in a vacuum,Shut lips, sleeping faces,Every stopped machine,The dumb and littered placesWhere crowds have been: …All silences rejoice,Weep (loudly or low),Speak–but with the voiceOf whom, I do not know.Absence, say, of Susan's,Absence of Egeria'sArms and respective bosoms,Lips and, ah, posteriors,Slowly form a presence;Whose? and, I ask, of whatSo absurd an essence,That something, which is not,Nevertheless should populateEmpty night more solidlyThan that with which we copulate,Why should it seem so squalidly?Well, I ga ve them that as an example, and they reported me to the Principal.""I'm not surprised," said Bernard. "It's flatly against all their sleep-teaching. R emember , they'v e had at least a quarter of a million w arn-ings against solitude.""I know . But I thought I'd lik e to see what the effect would be.""Well, you've seen now ."Helmholtz only laughed. "I feel," he said, after a silence, as though I were just beginning to ha ve something to write about. As though I were beginning to be able to use that power I feel I'v e got inside me–that extr a, latent power . Something seems to be coming to me." In spite of all his troubles, he seemed, Bernard thought, profoundly happy.Helmholtz and the Sa vage took to one another at once. So cordially indeed that Bernard felt a sharp pang of jealousy . In all these weeks he had nev er come to so close an intimacy with the Sa vage as Helm-holtz immediately achiev ed. W atching them, listening to their talk, he found himself sometimes resentfully wishing that he had nev er brought them together . He w as ashamed of his jealousy and alter-nately made efforts of will and took soma to keep himself from feeling it. But the efforts were not v ery successful; and between the soma-holida ys there were, of necessit y, interv als. The odious sentiment k ept on returning.At his third meeting with the Sa vage, Helmholtz recited his rh ymes on Solitude."What do y ou think of them?" he ask ed when he had done.The Sa vage shook his head. "Listen to this," w as his answer; and un-locking the dr awer in which he k ept his mouse-eaten book, he opened and read:"Let the bird of loudest layOn the sole Arabian tree,Herald sad and trumpet be …"Helmholtz listened with a growing ex citement. A t "sole Ar abian tree" he started; at "thou shrieking harbinger" he smiled with sudden pleas-ure; at "ev ery fowl of t yrant wing" the blood rushed up into his cheeks; but at "defunctiv e music" he turned pale and trembled with an  unprecedented emotion. The Sa vage read on:"Property was thus appall'd,That the self was not the same;Single nature's double nameNeither two nor one was call'dReason in itself confoundedSaw division grow together …""Orgy -porgy!" said Bernard, interrupting the reading with a loud, un-pleasant laugh. "It's just a Solidarit y Service h ymn." He w as rev enging  himself on his two friends for liking one another more than they lik ed him.In the course of their next two or three meetings he frequently re-peated this little act of v engeance. It w as simple and, since both Helmholtz and the Sa vage were dreadfully pained b y the shattering and defilement of a fa vourite poetic crystal, extremely effectiv e. In the  end, Helmholtz threatened to kick him out of the room if he dared to interrupt again. And y et, str angely enough, the next interruption, the most disgr aceful of all, came from Helmholtz himself .The Sa vage w as reading Romeo and Juliet aloud–reading (for all the time he w as seeing himself as R omeo and Lenina as Juliet) with an in-tense and quiv ering passion. Helmholtz had listened to the scene of the lo vers' first meeting with a puzzled interest. The scene in the or-chard had delighted him with its poetry; but the sentiments expressed had made him smile. Getting into such a state about ha ving a girl–it seemed r ather ridiculous. But, tak en detail b y verbal detail, what a su-perb piece of emotional engineering! "That old fellow ," he said, "he makes our best propaganda technicians look absolutely silly ." The Sa v-age smiled triumphantly and resumed his reading. All went toler ably well until, in the last scene of the third act, Capulet and Lady Capulet began to bully Juliet to marry P aris. Helmholtz had been restless throughout the entire scene; but when, pathetically mimed b y the Savage, Juliet cried out:"Is there no pity sitting in the clouds,That sees into the bottom of my grief?O sweet my mother, cast me not away:Delay this marriage for a month, a week;Or, if you do not, make the bridal bedIn that dim monument where Tybalt lies …"when Juliet said this, Helmholtz brok e out in an explosion of uncontrol-lable guffa wing.The mother and father (grotesque obscenit y) forcing the daughter to have some one she didn't w ant! And the idiotic girl not sa ying that she  was ha ving some one else whom (for the moment, at an y rate) she preferred! In its smutt y absurdit y the situation w as irresistibly comical.  He had managed, with a heroic effort, to hold down the mounting pressure of his hilarit y; but "sweet mother" (in the Sa vage's tremulous  tone of anguish) and the reference to T ybalt lying dead, but evidently uncremated and w asting his phosphorus on a dim monument, were too much for him. He laughed and laughed till the tears streamed down his face–quenchlessly laughed while, pale with a sense of out-rage, the Sa vage look ed at him o ver the top of his book and then, as the laughter still continued, closed it indignantly , got up and, with the gesture of one who remo ves his pearl from before swine, lock ed it away in its dr awer."And y et," said Helmholtz when, ha ving reco vered breath enough to apologiz e, he had mollified the Sa vage into listening to his explana-tions, "I know quite well that one needs ridiculous, mad situations lik e that; one can't write really well about an ything else. Wh y was that old fellow such a marv ellous propaganda technician? Because he had so many insane, ex cruciating things to get ex cited about. Y ou've got to be  hurt and upset; otherwise y ou can't think of the really good, penetr at-ing, X -rayish phr ases. But fathers and mothers!" He shook his head. "You can't expect me to k eep a str aight face about fathers and moth-ers. And who's going to get ex cited about a bo y having a girl or not having her?" (The Sa vage winced; but Helmholtz, who w as staring pensiv ely at the floor , saw nothing.) "No ." he concluded, with a sigh, "it won't do . We need some other kind of madness and violence. But what? What? Where can one find it?" He w as silent; then, shaking his head, "I don't know ," he said at last, "I don't know ."Chapter ThirteenHENRY FOSTER loomed up through the twilight of the Embry o Store."Like to come to a feely this ev ening?"Lenina shook her head without speaking."Going out with some one else?" It interested him to know which of his  friends w as being had b y which other . "Is it Benito?" he questioned.She shook her head again.Henry detected the weariness in those purple ey es, the pallor beneath that glaz e of lupus, the sadness at the corners of the unsmiling crim-son mouth. "Y ou're not feeling ill, are y ou?" he ask ed, a trifle anx-iously , afraid that she might be suffering from one of the few remain-ing infectious diseases.Yet once more Lenina shook her head."Anyhow, you ought to go and see the doctor ," said Henry . "A doctor a day keeps the jim-jams a way," he added heartily , driving home his hypnopædic adage with a clap on the shoulder . "Perhaps y ou need a Pregnancy Substitute," he suggested. "Or else an extr a-strong V .P.S. treatment. Sometimes, y ou know , the standard passion surrogate isn't  quite …""Oh, for F ord's sak e," said Lenina, breaking her stubborn silence, "shut  up!" And she turned back to her neglected embry os.A V.P.S. treatment indeed! She would ha ve laughed, if she hadn't been  on the point of crying. As though she hadn't got enough V . P. of her own! She sighed profoundly as she refilled her syringe. "John," she murmured to herself , "John …" Then "My F ord," she wondered, "ha ve I given this one its sleeping sickness injection, or ha ven't I?" She simply  couldn't remember . In the end, she decided not to run the risk of let-ting it ha ve a second dose, and mo ved down the line to the next bot-tle.Twenty-two y ears, eight months, and four da ys from that moment, a promising y oung Alpha-Minus administr ator at Mw anza-Mw anza w as to die of trypanosomiasis–the first case for o ver half a century . Sighing, Lenina went on with her work.An hour later , in the Changing R oom, F anny was energetically protest-ing. "But it's absurd to let y ourself get into a state lik e this. Simply ab-surd," she repeated. "And what about? A man–one man.""But he's the one I w ant.""As though there weren't millions of other men in the world.""But I don't w ant them.""How can y ou know till y ou've tried?""I have tried.""But how man y?" ask ed Fanny, shrugging her shoulders contemptu-ously. "One, two?""Dozens. But," shaking her head, "it w asn't an y good," she added."Well, you must persev ere," said F anny sententiously . But it w as obvi-ous that her confidence in her own prescriptions had been shak en. "Nothing can be achiev ed without persev erance.""But mean while …""Don't think of him.""I can't help it.""Take soma, then.""I do.""Well, go on.""But in the interv als I still lik e him. I shall alw ays like him.""Well, if that's the case," said F anny, with decision, "wh y don't y ou just  go and tak e him. Whether he w ants it or no .""But if y ou knew how terribly queer he w as!""All the more reason for taking a firm line.""It's all v ery well to say that.""Don't stand an y nonsense. Act." F anny's voice w as a trumpet; she might ha ve been a Y .W.F.A. lecturer giving an ev ening talk to adoles-cent Beta-Minuses. "Y es, act –at once. Do it now .""I'd be scared," said Lenina"Well, you've only got to tak e half a gr amme of soma first. And now I'm going to ha ve my bath." She marched off , trailing her towel.The bell r ang, and the Sa vage, who w as impatiently hoping that Helm-holtz would come that afternoon (for ha ving at last made up his mind to talk to Helmholtz about Lenina, he could not bear to postpone his confidences a moment longer), jumped up and r an to the door ."I had a premonition it w as you, Helmholtz," he shouted as he opened.On the threshold, in a white acetate-satin sailor suit, and with a round white cap r akishly tilted o ver her left ear , stood Lenina."Oh!" said the Sa vage, as though some one had struck him a hea vy blow.Half a gr amme had been enough to mak e Lenina forget her fears and her embarr assments. "Hullo , John," she said, smiling, and w alked past him into the room. A utomatically he closed the door and followed her . Lenina sat down. There w as a long silence."You don't seem v ery glad to see me, John," she said at last."Not glad?" The Sa vage look ed at her reproachfully; then suddenly fell on his knees before her and, taking Lenina's hand, rev erently kissed it.  "Not glad? Oh, if y ou only knew ," he whispered and, v enturing to r aise his ey es to her face, "Admired Lenina," he went on, "indeed the top of admir ation, worth what's dearest in the world." She smiled at him with  a luscious tenderness. "Oh, y ou so perfect" (she w as leaning tow ards him with parted lips), "so perfect and so peerless are created" (nearer and nearer) "of ev ery creature's best." Still nearer . The Sa vage sud-denly scr ambled to his feet. "That's wh y," he said speaking with averted face, "I w anted to do something first … I mean, to show I w as worth y of y ou. Not that I could ev er really be that. But at an y rate to show I w asn't absolutely un-worth y. I wanted to do something.""Why should y ou think it necessary …" Lenina began, but left the sen-tence unfinished. There w as a note of irritation in her v oice. When one has leant forw ard, nearer and nearer , with parted lips–only to find oneself , quite suddenly , as a clumsy oaf scr ambles to his feet, leaning towards nothing at all– well, there is a reason, ev en with half a gramme of soma circulating in one's blood-stream, a genuine reason for anno yance."At Malpais," the Sa vage w as incoherently mumbling, "y ou had to bring her the skin of a mountain lion– I mean, when y ou wanted to marry some one. Or else a wolf .""There aren't an y lions in England," Lenina almost snapped."And ev en if there were," the Sa vage added, with sudden contemptu-ous resentment, "people would kill them out of helicopters, I suppose, with poison gas or something. I wouldn't do that, Lenina." He squared his shoulders, he v entured to look at her and w as met with a stare of annoyed incomprehension. Confused, "I'll do an ything," he went on, more and more incoherently . "Anything y ou tell me. There be some sports are painful– you know . But their labour delight in them sets off . That's what I feel. I mean I'd sweep the floor if y ou wanted.""But we'v e got v acuum cleaners here," said Lenina in bewilderment. "It isn't necessary .""No, of course it isn't necessary. But some kinds of baseness are nobly  undergone. I'd lik e to undergo something nobly . Don't y ou see?""But if there are v acuum cleaners …""That's not the point.""And Epsilon Semi-Morons to work them," she went on, "well, really , why?""Why? But for y ou, for y ou. Just to show that I …""And what on earth v acuum cleaners ha ve got to do with lions …""To show how much …""Or lions with being glad to see me …" She w as getting more and more  exasper ated."How much I lo ve you, Lenina," he brought out almost desper ately.An emblem of the inner tide of startled elation, the blood rushed up into Lenina's cheeks. "Do y ou mean it, John?""But I hadn't meant to sa y so," cried the Sa vage, clasping his hands in  a kind of agon y. "Not until … Listen, Lenina; in Malpais people get mar-ried.""Get what?" The irritation had begun to creep back into her v oice. What w as he talking about now?"For alw ays. They mak e a promise to liv e together for alw ays.""What a horrible idea!" Lenina w as genuinely shock ed."Outliving beaut y's outw ard with a mind that cloth renew swifter than blood deca ys.""What?""It's lik e that in Shak espeare too . 'If thou cost break her virgin knot before all sanctimonious ceremonies ma y with full and holy rite …'""For Ford's sak e, John, talk sense. I can't understand a word y ou sa y. First it's v acuum cleaners; then it's knots. Y ou're driving me cr azy." She jumped up and, as though afr aid that he might run a way from her  physically , as well as with his mind, caught him b y the wrist. "Answer me this question: do y ou really lik e me, or don't y ou?"There w as a moment's silence; then, in a v ery low v oice, "I lo ve you more than an ything in the world," he said."Then wh y on earth didn't y ou sa y so?" she cried, and so intense w as her exasper ation that she dro ve her sharp nails into the skin of his wrist. "Instead of driv elling a way about knots and v acuum cleaners and lions, and making me miser able for weeks and weeks."She released his hand and flung it angrily a way from her ."If I didn't lik e you so much," she said, "I'd be furious with y ou."And suddenly her arms were round his neck; he felt her lips soft against his own. So deliciously soft, so w arm and electric that inevita-bly he found himself thinking of the embr aces in Three Weeks in a Helicopter. Ooh! ooh! the stereoscopic blonde and anh! the more than real blackamoor . Horror , horror , horror … he fired to disengage himself;  but Lenina tightened her embr ace."Why didn't y ou sa y so?" she whispered, dr awing back her face to look  at him. Her ey es were tenderly reproachful."The murkiest den, the most opportune place" (the v oice of conscience  thundered poetically), "the strongest suggestion our worser genius can, shall nev er melt mine honour into lust. Nev er, never!" he re-solved."You silly bo y!" she w as saying. "I w anted y ou so much. And if y ou wanted me too , why didn't y ou? …""But, Lenina …" he began protesting; and as she immediately untwined  her arms, as she stepped a way from him, he thought, for a moment, that she had tak en his unspok en hint. But when she unbuckled her white patent cartridge belt and hung it carefully o ver the back of a chair, he began to suspect that he had been mistak en."Lenina!" he repeated apprehensiv ely.She put her hand to her neck and ga ve a long v ertical pull; her white sailor's blouse w as ripped to the hem; suspicion condensed into a too , too solid certaint y. "Lenina, what are you doing?"Zip, zip! Her answer w as wordless. She stepped out of her bell-bottomed trousers. Her zippicamiknicks were a pale shell pink. The Arch-Communit y-Songster's golden T dangled at her breast."For those milk paps that through the window bars bore at men's eyes...." The singing, thundering, magical words made her seem dou-bly dangerous, doubly alluring. Soft, soft, but how piercing! boring and  drilling into reason, tunnelling through resolution. "The strongest oaths  are str aw to the fire i' the blood. Be more abstemious, or else …"Zip! The rounded pinkness fell apart lik e a neatly divided apple. A wriggle of the arms, a lifting first of the right foot, then the left: the zippicamiknicks were lying lifeless and as though deflated on the floor .Still wearing her shoes and socks, and her r akishly tilted round white cap, she adv anced tow ards him. "Darling. Darling! If only y ou'd said so  before!" She held out her arms.But instead of also sa ying "Darling!" and holding out his arms, the Savage retreated in terror , flapping his hands at her as though he were  trying to scare a way some intruding and dangerous animal. F our backw ards steps, and he w as brought to ba y against the w all."Sweet!" said Lenina and, la ying her hands on his shoulders, pressed herself against him. "Put y our arms round me," she commanded. "Hug  me till y ou drug me, honey ." She too had poetry at her command, knew words that sang and were spells and beat drums. "Kiss me"; she  closed her ey es, she let her v oice sink to a sleep y murmur , "Kiss me till  I'm in a coma. Hug me, honey , snuggly …"The Sa vage caught her b y the wrists, tore her hands from his shoul-ders, thrust her roughly a way at arm's length."Ow, you're hurting me, y ou're … oh!" She w as suddenly silent. T error had made her forget the pain. Opening her ey es, she had seen his face–no , not his face, a ferocious str anger's, pale, distorted, twitching with some insane, inexplicable fury . Aghast, "But what is it, John?" she  whispered. He did not answer , but only stared into her face with those mad ey es. The hands that held her wrists were trembling. He breathed  deeply and irregularly . Faint almost to imperceptibilit y, but appalling, she suddenly heard the grinding of his teeth. "What is it?" she almost screamed.And as though a wakened b y her cry he caught her b y the shoulders and shook her . "Whore!" he shouted "Whore! Impudent strumpet!""Oh, don't, do-on't," she protested in a v oice made grotesquely tremu-lous b y his shaking."Whore!""Plea-ease.""Damned whore!""A gra-amme is be-etter …" she began.The Sa vage pushed her a way with such force that she staggered and fell. "Go ," he shouted, standing o ver her menacingly , "get out of m y sight or I'll kill y ou." He clenched his fists.Lenina r aised her arm to co ver her face. "No , please don't, John …""Hurry up . Quick!"One arm still r aised, and following his ev ery mo vement with a terrified eye, she scr ambled to her feet and still crouching, still co vering her head, made a dash for the bathroom.The noise of that prodigious slap b y which her departure w as acceler-ated w as like a pistol shot."Ow!" Lenina bounded forw ard.Safely lock ed into the bathroom, she had leisure to tak e stock of her injuries. Standing with her back to the mirror , she twisted her head. Looking o ver her left shoulder she could see the imprint of an open hand standing out distinct and crimson on the pearly flesh. Gingerly she rubbed the wounded spot.Outside, in the other room, the Sa vage w as striding up and down, marching, marching to the drums and music of magical words. "The wren goes to't and the small gilded fly does lecher in m y sight." Mad-deningly they rumbled in his ears. "The fitchew nor the soiled horse goes to't with a more riotous appetite. Down from the w aist they are Centaurs, though women all abo ve. But to the girdle do the gods in-herit. Beneath is all the fiend's. There's hell, there's darkness, there is the sulphurous pit, burning scalding, stench, consumption; fie, fie, fie, pain, pain! Giv e me an ounce of civ et, good apothecary , to sweeten m y imagination.""John!" v entured a small ingr atiating v oice from the bathroom. "John!""O thou weed, who are so lo vely fair and smell'st so sweet that the sense aches at thee. W as this most goodly book made to write 'whore' upon? Hea ven stops the nose at it …"But her perfume still hung about him, his jack et was white with the powder that had scented her v elvety body . "Impudent strumpet, im-pudent strumpet, impudent strumpet." The inex orable rh ythm beat it-self out. "Impudent …""John, do y ou think I might ha ve my clothes?"He pick ed up the bell-bottomed trousers, the blouse, the zippicami-knicks."Open!" he ordered, kicking the door ."No, I won't." The v oice w as frightened and defiant."Well, how do y ou expect me to giv e them to y ou?""Push them through the v entilator o ver the door ."He did what she suggested and returned to his uneasy pacing of the room. "Impudent strumpet, impudent strumpet. The devil Luxury with his fat rump and potato finger …""John."He would not answer . "Fat rump and potato finger .""John.""What is it?" he ask ed gruffly ."I wonder if y ou'd mind giving me m y Malthusian belt."Lenina sat, listening to the footsteps in the other room, wondering, as she listened, how long he w as likely to go tr amping up and down lik e that; whether she would ha ve to w ait until he left the flat; or if it would be safe, after allowing his madness a reasonable time to sub-side, to open the bathroom door and mak e a dash for it.She w as interrupted in the midst of these uneasy speculations b y the sound of the telephone bell ringing in the other room. Abruptly the tramping ceased. She heard the v oice of the Sa vage parleying with si-lence."Hullo .". . . . ."Yes.". . . . ."If I do not usurp m yself, I am.". . . . ."Yes, didn't y ou hear me sa y so? Mr . Savage speaking.". . . . ."What? Who's ill? Of course it interests me.". . . . ."But is it serious? Is she really bad? I'll go at once …". . . . ."Not in her rooms an y more? Where has she been tak en?". . . . ."Oh, m y God! What's the address?". . . . ."Three P ark Lane–is that it? Three? Thanks."Lenina heard the click of the replaced receiv er, then hurrying steps. A door slammed. There w as silence. W as he really gone?With an infinit y of precautions she opened the door a quarter of an inch; peeped through the cr ack; w as encour aged b y the view of emp-tiness; opened a little further , and put her whole head out; finally tip-toed into the room; stood for a few seconds with strongly beating heart, listening, listening; then darted to the front door , opened, slipped through, slammed, r an. It w as not till she w as in the lift and actually dropping down the well that she began to feel herself secure.Chapter FourteenTHE Park Lane Hospital for the Dying w as a sixt y-story tower of prim-rose tiles. As the Sa vage stepped out of his taxicopter a con voy of gaily-coloured aerial hearses rose whirring from the roof and darted away across the P ark, westw ards, bound for the Slough Crematorium. At the lift gates the presiding porter ga ve him the information he re-quired, and he dropped down to W ard 81 (a Galloping Senilit y ward, the porter explained) on the sev enteenth floor .It was a large room bright with sunshine and y ellow paint, and con-taining twent y beds, all occupied. Linda w as dying in compan y–in compan y and with all the modern con veniences. The air w as continu-ously aliv e with ga y synthetic melodies. A t the foot of ev ery bed, con-fronting its moribund occupant, w as a television bo x. Television w as left on, a running tap , from morning till night. Ev ery quarter of an hour  the prev ailing perfume of the room w as automatically changed. "W e try," explained the nurse, who had tak en charge of the Sa vage at the door, "we try to create a thoroughly pleasant atmosphere here–some-thing between a first -class hotel and a feely -palace, if y ou tak e my meaning.""Where is she?" ask ed the Sa vage, ignoring these polite explanations.The nurse w as offended. "Y ou are in a hurry ," she said."Is there an y hope?" he ask ed."You mean, of her not dying?" (He nodded.) "No , of course there isn't. When somebody's sent here, there's no …" Startled b y the expression of distress on his pale face, she suddenly brok e off. "Wh y, whatev er is the matter?" she ask ed. She w as not accustomed to this kind of thing in visitors. (Not that there were man y visitors an yhow: or an y reason why there should be man y visitors.) "Y ou're not feeling ill, are y ou?"He shook his head. "She's m y mother ," he said in a scarcely audible voice.The nurse glanced at him with startled, horrified ey es; then quickly looked away. From throat to temple she w as all one hot blush."Take me to her ," said the Sa vage, making an effort to speak in an or-dinary tone.Still blushing, she led the w ay down the w ard. F aces still fresh and un-withered (for senilit y galloped so hard that it had no time to age the cheeks–only the heart and br ain) turned as they passed. Their pro-gress w as followed b y the blank, incurious ey es of second infancy . The Savage shuddered as he look ed.Linda w as lying in the last of the long row of beds, next to the w all. Propped up on pillows, she w as watching the Semi-finals of the South American Riemann- Surface T ennis Championship , which were being played in silent and diminished reproduction on the screen of the tele-vision bo x at the foot of the bed. Hither and thither across their square  of illuminated glass the little figures noiselessly darted, lik e fish in an aquarium–the silent but agitated inhabitants of another world.Linda look ed on, v aguely and uncomprehendingly smiling. Her pale, bloated face wore an expression of imbecile happiness. Ev ery now and then her ey elids closed, and for a few seconds she seemed to be doz-ing. Then with a little start she would w ake up again– wake up to the aquarium antics of the T ennis Champions, to the Super -Vox-Wurlitzeriana rendering of "Hug me till y ou drug me, honey ," to the warm dr aught of v erbena that came blowing through the v entilator above her head– would w ake to these things, or r ather to a dream of which these things, tr ansformed and embellished b y the soma in her blood, were the marv ellous constituents, and smile once more her broken and discoloured smile of infantile contentment."Well, I must go ," said the nurse. "I'v e got m y batch of children com-ing. Besides, there's Number 3." She pointed up the w ard. "Might go off an y minute now . Well, mak e yourself comfortable." She w alked briskly a way.The Sa vage sat down beside the bed."Linda," he whispered, taking her hand.At the sound of her name, she turned. Her v ague ey es brightened with  recognition. She squeez ed his hand, she smiled, her lips mo ved; then quite suddenly her head fell forw ard. She w as asleep . He sat w atching her–seeking through the tired flesh, seeking and finding that y oung, bright face which had stooped o ver his childhood in Malpais, remem-bering (and he closed his ey es) her v oice, her mo vements, all the events of their life together . "Streptocock -Gee to Banbury T …" How beautiful her singing had been! And those childish rh ymes, how magi-cally str ange and m ysterious!A, B, C, vitamin D:The fat's in the liver, the cod's in the sea.He felt the hot tears welling up behind his ey elids as he recalled the words and Linda's v oice as she repeated them. And then the reading lessons: The tot is in the pot, the cat is on the mat; and the Elemen-tary Instructions for Beta W orkers in the Embry o Store. And long ev e-nings b y the fire or , in summertime, on the roof of the little house, when she told him those stories about the Other Place, outside the Reserv ation: that beautiful, beautiful Other Place, whose memory , as of a hea ven, a par adise of goodness and lo veliness, he still k ept whole and intact, undefiled b y contact with the realit y of this real London, these actual civiliz ed men and women.A sudden noise of shrill v oices made him open his ey es and, after hastily brushing a way the tears, look round. What seemed an intermi-nable stream of identical eight -year-old male twins w as pouring into the room. T win after twin, twin after twin, they came– a nightmare. Their faces, their repeated face–for there w as only one between the lot  of them–puggishly stared, all nostrils and pale goggling ey es. Their uniform w as khaki. All their mouths hung open. Squealing and chatter-ing they entered. In a moment, it seemed, the w ard w as maggot y with  them. They sw armed between the beds, clambered o ver, crawled un-der, peeped into the television bo xes, made faces at the patients.Linda astonished and r ather alarmed them. A group stood clustered at the foot of her bed, staring with the frightened and stupid curiosit y of animals suddenly confronted b y the unknown."Oh, look, look!" They spok e in low , scared v oices. "Whatev er is the matter with her? Wh y is she so fat?"They had nev er seen a face lik e hers before–had nev er seen a face that w as not y outhful and taut -skinned, a body that had ceased to be slim and upright. All these moribund sexagenarians had the appear-ance of childish girls. A t forty-four, Linda seemed, b y contr ast, a mon-ster of flaccid and distorted senilit y."Isn't she a wful?" came the whispered comments. "Look at her teeth!"Suddenly from under the bed a pug-faced twin popped up between John's chair and the w all, and began peering into Linda's sleeping face."I say …" he began; but the sentence ended prematurely in a squeal. The Sa vage had seiz ed him b y the collar , lifted him clear o ver the chair  and, with a smart bo x on the ears, sent him howling a way.His yells brought the Head Nurse hurrying to the rescue."What ha ve you been doing to him?" she demanded fiercely . "I won't have you striking the children.""Well then, k eep them a way from this bed." The Sa vage's v oice w as trembling with indignation. "What are these filth y little br ats doing here at all? It's disgr aceful!""Disgr aceful? But what do y ou mean? They're being death-conditioned.  And I tell y ou," she w arned him truculently , "if I ha ve any more of y our interference with their conditioning, I'll send for the porters and ha ve you thrown out."The Sa vage rose to his feet and took a couple of steps tow ards her . His movements and the expression on his face were so menacing that the nurse fell back in terror . With a great effort he check ed himself and, without speaking, turned a way and sat down again b y the bed.Reassured, but with a dignit y that w as a trifle shrill and uncertain, "I've warned y ou," said the nurse, "I'v e warned y ou," said the nurse, "so mind." Still, she led the too inquisitiv e twins a way and made them join in the game of hunt -the-zipper , which had been organiz ed by one of her colleagues at the other end of the room."Run along now and ha ve your cup of caffeine solution, dear ," she said to the other nurse. The ex ercise of authorit y restored her confidence, made her feel better . "Now children!" she called.Linda had stirred uneasily , had opened her ey es for a moment, look ed vaguely around, and then once more dropped off to sleep . Sitting be-side her , the Sa vage tried hard to recapture his mood of a few minutes  before. "A, B , C, vitamin D ," he repeated to himself , as though the words were a spell that would restore the dead past to life. But the spell w as ineffectiv e. Obstinately the beautiful memories refused to rise; there w as only a hateful resurrection of jealousies and uglinesses and miseries. P opé with the blood trickling down from his cut shoulder;  and Linda hideously asleep , and the flies buzzing round the spilt mes-cal on the floor beside the bed; and the bo ys calling those names as she passed. … Ah, no , no! He shut his ey es, he shook his head in strenuous denial of these memories. "A, B , C, vitamin D …" He tried to think of those times when he sat on her knees and she put her arms about him and sang, o ver and o ver again, rocking him, rocking him to sleep. "A, B , C, vitamin D , vitamin D , vitamin D …"The Super -Vox-Wurlitzeriana had risen to a sobbing crescendo; and suddenly the v erbena ga ve place, in the scent -circulating system, to an intense patchouli. Linda stirred, wok e up, stared for a few seconds bewilderly at the Semi-finalists, then, lifting her face, sniffed once or twice at the newly perfumed air and suddenly smiled– a smile of child-ish ecstasy ."Popé!" she murmured, and closed her ey es. "Oh, I do so lik e it, I do …" She sighed and let herself sink back into the pillows."But, Linda!" The Sa vage spok e imploringly , "Don't y ou know me?" He had tried so hard, had done his v ery best; wh y wouldn't she allow him to forget? He squeez ed her limp hand almost with violence, as though he would force her to come back from this dream of ignoble pleasures,  from these base and hateful memories–back into the present, back into realit y: the appalling present, the a wful realit y–but sublime, but significant, but desper ately important precisely because of the immi-nence of that which made them so fearful. "Don't y ou know me, Linda?"He felt the faint answering pressure of her hand. The tears started into  his ey es. He bent o ver her and kissed her .Her lips mo ved. "P opé!" she whispered again, and it w as as though he had had a pailful of ordure thrown in his face.Anger suddenly boiled up in him. Balk ed for the second time, the pas-sion of his grief had found another outlet, w as transformed into a pas-sion of agoniz ed rage."But I'm John!" he shouted. "I'm John!" And in his furious misery he actually caught her b y the shoulder and shook her .Linda's ey es fluttered open; she sa w him, knew him–"John!"–but situ-ated the real face, the real and violent hands, in an imaginary world–among the in ward and priv ate equiv alents of patchouli and the Super -Wurlitzer, among the tr ansfigured memories and the str angely tr ans-posed sensations that constituted the univ erse of her dream. She knew him for John, her son, but fancied him an intruder into that paradisal Malpais where she had been spending her soma-holida y with Popé. He w as angry because she lik ed Popé, he w as shaking her be-cause P opé w as there in the bed– as though there were something wrong, as though all civiliz ed people didn't do the same. "Ev ery one belongs to ev ery …" Her v oice suddenly died into an almost inaudible breathless croaking. Her mouth fell open: she made a desper ate effort to fill her lungs with air . But it w as as though she had forgotten how to  breathe. She tried to cry out –but no sound came; only the terror of her staring ey es rev ealed what she w as suffering. Her hands went to her throat, then cla wed at the air –the air she could no longer breathe, the air that, for her , had ceased to exist.The Sa vage w as on his feet, bent o ver her . "What is it, Linda? What is it?" His v oice w as imploring; it w as as though he were begging to be reassured.The look she ga ve him w as charged with an unspeakable terror –with terror and, it seemed to him, reproach.She tried to r aise herself in bed, but fell back on to the pillows. Her face w as horribly distorted, her lips blue.The Sa vage turned and r an up the w ard."Quick, quick!" he shouted. "Quick!"Standing in the centre of a ring of zipper -hunting twins, the Head Nurse look ed round. The first moment's astonishment ga ve place al-most instantly to disappro val. "Don't shout! Think of the little ones," she said, frowning. "Y ou might decondition … But what are y ou doing?"  He had brok en through the ring. "Be careful!" A child w as yelling."Quick, quick!" He caught her b y the sleev e, dragged her after him. "Quick! Something's happened. I'v e killed her ."By the time they were back at the end of the w ard Linda w as dead.The Sa vage stood for a moment in froz en silence, then fell on his knees beside the bed and, co vering his face with his hands, sobbed uncontrollably .The nurse stood irresolute, looking now at the kneeling figure b y the bed (the scandalous exhibition!) and now (poor children!) at the twins who had stopped their hunting of the zipper and were staring from the  other end of the w ard, staring with all their ey es and nostrils at the shocking scene that w as being enacted round Bed 20. Should she speak to him? try to bring him back to a sense of decency? remind him  of where he w as? of what fatal mischief he might do to these poor in-nocents? Undoing all their wholesome death-conditioning with this dis-gusting outcry –as though death were something terrible, as though any one mattered as much as all that! It might giv e them the most disastrous ideas about the subject, might upset them into reacting in the entirely wrong, the utterly anti-social w ay.She stepped forw ard, she touched him on the shoulder . "Can't y ou be-have?" she said in a low , angry v oice. But, looking around, she sa w that half a doz en twins were already on their feet and adv ancing down the w ard. The circle w as disintegr ating. In another moment … No , the risk w as too great; the whole Group might be put back six or sev en months in its conditioning. She hurried back tow ards her menaced charges."Now, who w ants a chocolate éclair?" she ask ed in a loud, cheerful tone."Me!" y elled the entire Bokano vsky Group in chorus. Bed 20 w as com-pletely forgotten."Oh, God, God, God …" the Sa vage k ept repeating to himself . In the chaos of grief and remorse that filled his mind it w as the one articulate  word. "God!" he whispered it aloud. "God …""Whatev er is he sa ying?" said a v oice, v ery near , distinct and shrill through the w arblings of the Super -Wurlitzer.The Sa vage violently started and, unco vering his face, look ed round. Five khaki twins, each with the stump of a long éclair in his right hand,  and their identical faces v ariously smeared with liquid chocolate, were standing in a row , puggily goggling at him.They met his ey es and simultaneously grinned. One of them pointed with his éclair butt."Is she dead?" he ask ed.The Sa vage stared at them for a moment in silence. Then in silence he  rose to his feet, in silence slowly w alked tow ards the door ."Is she dead?" repeated the inquisitiv e twin trotting at his side.The Sa vage look ed down at him and still without speaking pushed him away. The twin fell on the floor and at once began to howl. The Sa vage did not ev en look round.Chapter FifteenTHE menial staff of the P ark Lane Hospital for the Dying consisted of one hundred and sixt y-two Deltas divided into two Bokano vsky Groups  of eight y-four red headed female and sev enty-eight dark doly cho-cephalic male twins, respectiv ely. At six, when their working da y was over, the two Groups assembled in the v estibule of the Hospital and were serv ed by the Deput y Sub-Bursar with their soma ration.From the lift the Sa vage stepped out into the midst of them. But his mind w as elsewhere– with death, with his grief , and his remorse; me-chanicaly , without consciousness of what he w as doing, he began to shoulder his w ay through the crowd."Who are y ou pushing? Where do y ou think y ou're going?"High, low , from a multitude of separ ate throats, only two v oices squeak ed or growled. R epeated indefinitely , as though b y a tr ain of mirrors, two faces, one a hairless and freckled moon haloed in or ange,  the other a thin, beak ed bird-mask, stubbly with two da ys' beard, turned angrily tow ards him. Their words and, in his ribs, the sharp nudging of elbows, brok e through his una wareness. He wok e once more to external realit y, look ed round him, knew what he sa w–knew it, with a sinking sense of horror and disgust, for the recurrent delir-ium of his da ys and nights, the nightmare of sw arming indistinguish-able sameness. T wins, twins. … Lik e maggots they had sw armed defil-ingly o ver the m ystery of Linda's death. Maggots again, but larger , full grown, they now cr awled across his grief and his repentance. He halted and, with bewildered and horrified ey es, stared round him at the khaki mob , in the midst of which, o vertopping it b y a full head, he stood. "How man y goodly creatures are there here!" The singing words  mock ed him derisiv ely. "How beauteous mankind is! O br ave new world …""Soma distribution!" shouted a loud v oice. "In good order , please. Hurry up there."A door had been opened, a table and chair carried into the v estibule. The v oice w as that of a jaunt y young Alpha, who had entered carrying a black iron cash-bo x. A murmur of satisfaction went up from the ex-pectant twins. They forgot all about the Sa vage. Their attention w as now focused on the black cash-bo x, which the y oung man had placed on the table, and w as now in process of unlocking. The lid w as lifted."Oo-oh!" said all the hundred and sixt y-two simultaneously , as though they were looking at fireworks.The y oung man took out a handful of tin y pill-bo xes. "Now ," he said peremptorily , "step forw ard, please. One at a time, and no sho ving."One at a time, with no sho ving, the twins stepped forw ard. First two males, then a female, then another male, then three females, then …The Sa vage stood looking on. "O br ave new world, O br ave new world …" In his mind the singing words seemed to change their tone. They had mock ed him through his misery and remorse, mock ed him with how hideous a note of cynical derision! Fiendishly laughing, they had insisted on the low squalor , the nauseous ugliness of the nightmare. Now, suddenly , they trumpeted a call to arms. "O br ave new world!" Miranda w as proclaiming the possibilit y of lo veliness, the possibilit y of transforming ev en the nightmare into something fine and noble. "O brave new world!" It w as a challenge, a command."No sho ving there now!" shouted the Deput y Sub-Bursar in a fury . He slammed down he lid of his cash-bo x. "I shall stop the distribution un-less I ha ve good beha viour."The Deltas muttered, jostled one another a little, and then were still. The threat had been effectiv e. Depriv ation of soma–appalling thought!"That's better ," said the y oung man, and reopened his cash-bo x.Linda had been a sla ve, Linda had died; others should liv e in freedom, and the world be made beautiful. A repar ation, a dut y. And suddenly it was luminously clear to the Sa vage what he must do; it w as as though  a shutter had been opened, a curtain dr awn back."Now," said the Deput y Sub-Bursar .Another khaki female stepped forw ard."Stop!" called the Sa vage in a loud and ringing v oice. "Stop!"He pushed his w ay to the table; the Deltas stared at him with aston-ishment."Ford!" said the Deput y Sub-Bursar , below his breath. "It's the Sa v-age." He felt scared."Listen, I beg of y ou," cried the Sa vage earnestly . "Lend me y our ears …" He had nev er spok en in public before, and found it v ery difficult to express what he w anted to sa y. "Don't tak e that horrible stuff . It's poi-son, it's poison.""I say, Mr. Savage," said the Deput y Sub-Bursar , smiling propitiatingly . "Would y ou mind letting me …""Poison to soul as well as body .""Yes, but let me get on with m y distribution, won't y ou? There's a good  fellow ." With the cautious tenderness of one who strok es a notoriously vicious animal, he patted the Sa vage's arm. "Just let me …""Never!" cried the Sa vage."But look here, old man …""Throw it all a way, that horrible poison."The words "Throw it all a way" pierced through the enfolding la yers of incomprehension to the quick of the Delta's consciousness. An angry murmur went up from the crowd."I come to bring y ou freedom," said the Sa vage, turning back tow ards the twins. "I come …"The Deput y Sub-Bursar heard no more; he had slipped out of the v es-tibule and w as looking up a number in the telephone book."Not in his own rooms," Bernard summed up . "Not in mine, not in yours. Not at the Aphroditaum; not at the Centre or the College. Where can he ha ve got to?"Helmholtz shrugged his shoulders. They had come back from their work expecting to find the Sa vage w aiting for them at one or other of the usual meeting-places, and there w as no sign of the fellow . Which was anno ying, as they had meant to nip across to Biarritz in Helm-holtz's four -seater sporticopter . They'd be late for dinner if he didn't come soon."We'll giv e him fiv e more minutes," said Helmholtz. "If he doesn't turn up by then, we'll …"The ringing of the telephone bell interrupted him. He pick ed up the re-ceiver. "Hullo . Speaking." Then, after a long interv al of listening, "F ord in Flivv er!" he swore. "I'll come at once.""What is it?" Bernard ask ed."A fellow I know at the P ark Lane Hospital," said Helmholtz. "The Sa v-age is there. Seems to ha ve gone mad. An yhow, it's urgent. Will y ou come with me?"Together they hurried along the corridor to the lifts."But do y ou lik e being sla ves?" the Sa vage w as saying as they entered  the Hospital. His face w as flushed, his ey es bright with ardour and in-dignation. "Do y ou lik e being babies? Y es, babies. Mewling and puk-ing," he added, exasper ated b y their bestial stupidit y into throwing in-sults at those he had come to sa ve. The insults bounced off their car a-pace of thick stupidit y; they stared at him with a blank expression of dull and sullen resentment in their ey es. "Y es, puking!" he fairly shouted. Grief and remorse, compassion and dut y–all were forgotten now and, as it were, absorbed into an intense o verpowering hatred of these less than human monsters. "Don't y ou want to be free and men?  Don't y ou ev en understand what manhood and freedom are?" R age was making him fluent; the words came easily , in a rush. "Don't y ou?" he repeated, but got no answer to his question. "V ery well then," he went on grimly . "I'll teach y ou; I'll make you be free whether y ou want to or not." And pushing open a window that look ed on to the inner court of the Hospital, he began to throw the little pill-bo xes of soma tablets in handfuls out into the area.For a moment the khaki mob w as silent, petrified, at the spectacle of this w anton sacrilege, with amaz ement and horror ."He's mad," whispered Bernard, staring with wide open ey es. "They'll kill him. They'll …" A great shout suddenly went up from the mob; a wave of mo vement dro ve it menacingly tow ards the Sa vage. "F ord help him!" said Bernard, and a verted his ey es."Ford helps those who help themselv es." And with a laugh, actually a laugh of exultation, Helmholtz W atson pushed his w ay through the crowd."Free, free!" the Sa vage shouted, and with one hand continued to throw the soma into the area while, with the other , he punched the in-distinguishable faces of his assailants. "Free!" And suddenly there w as Helmholtz at his side–"Good old Helmholtz!"– also punching–"Men at last!"– and in the interv al also throwing the poison out b y handfuls through the open window . "Yes, men! men!" and there w as no more poison left. He pick ed up the cash-bo x and showed them its black emptiness. "Y ou're free!"Howling, the Deltas charged with a redoubled fury .Hesitant on the fringes of the battle. "They're done for ," said Bernard and, urged b y a sudden impulse, r an forw ard to help them; then thought better of it and halted; then, ashamed, stepped forw ard again; then again thought better of it, and w as standing in an agon y of humiliated indecision–thinking that they might be killed if he didn't help them, and that he might be killed if he did– when (F ord be praised!), goggle-ey ed and swine-snouted in their gas-masks, in r an the police.Bernard dashed to meet them. He w aved his arms; and it w as action, he was doing something. He shouted "Help!" sev eral times, more and more loudly so as to giv e himself the illusion of helping. "Help! Help! HELP!"The policemen pushed him out of the w ay and got on with their work. Three men with spr aying machines buckled to their shoulders pumped thick clouds of soma vapour into the air . Two more were busy round the portable S ynthetic Music Bo x. Carrying w ater pistols charged with a powerful anæsthetic, four others had pushed their w ay into the crowd and were methodically la ying out, squirt b y squirt, the more fe-rocious of the fighters."Quick, quick!" y elled Bernard. "They'll be killed if y ou don't hurry . They'll … Oh!" Anno yed by his chatter , one of the policemen had giv en him a shot from his w ater pistol. Bernard stood for a second or two wambling unsteadily on legs that seemed to ha ve lost their bones, their tendons, their muscles, to ha ve become mere sticks of jelly , and at last not ev en jelly -water: he tumbled in a heap on the floor .Suddenly , from out of the S ynthetic Music Bo x a Voice began to speak.  The V oice of R eason, the V oice of Good F eeling. The sound-tr ack roll was un winding itself in S ynthetic Anti-Riot Speech Number T wo (Me-dium Strength). Str aight from the depths of a non-existent heart, "My friends, m y friends!" said the V oice so pathetically , with a note of such infinitely tender reproach that, behind their gas masks, ev en the po-licemen's ey es were momentarily dimmed with tears, "what is the meaning of this? Wh y aren't y ou all being happ y and good together? Happy and good," the V oice repeated. "A t peace, at peace." It trem-bled, sank into a whisper and momentarily expired. "Oh, I do w ant you to be happ y," it began, with a y earning earnestness. "I do so w ant you to be good! Please, please be good and …"Two minutes later the V oice and the soma vapour had produced their effect. In tears, the Deltas were kissing and hugging one another –half a doz en twins at a time in a comprehensiv e embr ace. Ev en Helmholtz and the Sa vage were almost crying. A fresh supply of pill-bo xes was brought in from the Bursary; a new distribution w as hastily made and, to the sound of the V oice's richly affectionate, baritone v aledictions, the twins dispersed, blubbering as though their hearts would break. "Good-b ye, my dearest, dearest friends, F ord keep y ou! Good-b ye, my dearest, dearest friends, F ord keep y ou. Good-b ye my dearest, dearest  …"When the last of the Deltas had gone the policeman switched off the current. The angelic V oice fell silent."Will y ou come quietly?" ask ed the Sergeant, "or must we anæsthe-tize?" He pointed his w ater pistol menacingly ."Oh, we'll come quietly ," the Sa vage answered, dabbing alternately a cut lip , a scr atched neck, and a bitten left hand.Still k eeping his handk erchief to his bleeding nose Helmholtz nodded in  confirmation.Awake and ha ving reco vered the use of his legs, Bernard had chosen this moment to mo ve as inconspicuously as he could tow ards the door ."Hi, y ou there," called the Sergeant, and a swine-mask ed policeman hurried across the room and laid a hand on the y oung man's shoulder .Bernard turned with an expression of indignant innocence. Escaping? He hadn't dreamed of such a thing. "Though what on earth y ou want me for ," he said to the Sergeant, "I really can't imagine.""You're a friend of the prisoner's, aren't y ou?""Well …" said Bernard, and hesitated. No , he really couldn't den y it. "Why shouldn't I be?" he ask ed."Come on then," said the Sergeant, and led the w ay tow ards the door and the w aiting police car .Chapter SixteenTHE ROOM into which the three were ushered w as the Controller's study ."His fordship will be down in a moment." The Gamma butler left them to themselv es.Helmholtz laughed aloud."It's more lik e a caffeine-solution part y than a trial," he said, and let himself fall into the most luxurious of the pneumatic arm-chairs. "Cheer up , Bernard," he added, catching sight of his friend's green un-happy face. But Bernard would not be cheered; without answering, without ev en looking at Helmholtz, he went and sat down on the most uncomfortable chair in the room, carefully chosen in the obscure hope of somehow deprecating the wr ath of the higher powers.The Sa vage mean while w andered restlessly round the room, peering with a v ague superficial inquisitiv eness at the books in the shelv es, at the sound-tr ack rolls and reading machine bobbins in their numbered pigeon-holes. On the table under the window la y a massiv e volume bound in limp black leather -surrogate, and stamped with large golden T's. He pick ed it up and opened it. MY LIFE AND WORK, BY OUR FORD . The book had been published at Detroit b y the Societ y for the Propa-gation of F ordian Knowledge. Idly he turned the pages, read a sen-tence here, a par agraph there, and had just come to the conclusion that the book didn't interest him, when the door opened, and the R esi-dent W orld Controller for W estern Europe w alked briskly into the room.Mustapha Mond shook hands with all three of them; but it w as to the Savage that he addressed himself . "So y ou don't much lik e civilization,  Mr. Savage," he said.The Sa vage look ed at him. He had been prepared to lie, to bluster , to remain sullenly unresponsiv e; but, reassured b y the good-humoured intelligence of the Controller's face, he decided to tell the truth, straightforw ardly. "No." He shook his head.Bernard started and look ed horrified. What would the Controller think? To be labelled as the friend of a man who said that he didn't lik e civili-zation–said it openly and, of all people, to the Controller –it was terri-ble. "But, John," he began. A look from Mustapha Mond reduced him to an abject silence."Of course," the Sa vage went on to admit, "there are some v ery nice things. All that music in the air , for instance …""Sometimes a thousand tw angling instruments will hum about m y ears  and sometimes v oices."The Sa vage's face lit up with a sudden pleasure. "Ha ve you read it too?" he ask ed. "I thought nobody knew about that book here, in Eng-land.""Almost nobody . I'm one of the v ery few . It's prohibited, y ou see. But as I mak e the la ws here, I can also break them. With impunit y, Mr. Marx," he added, turning to Bernard. "Which I'm afr aid you can't do."Bernard sank into a y et more hopeless misery ."But wh y is it prohibited?" ask ed the Sa vage. In the ex citement of meeting a man who had read Shak espeare he had momentarily forgot-ten ev erything else.The Controller shrugged his shoulders. "Because it's old; that's the chief reason. W e haven't an y use for old things here.""Even when they're beautiful?""Particularly when they're beautiful. Beaut y's attr active, and we don't want people to be attr acted b y old things. W e want them to lik e the new ones.""But the new ones are so stupid and horrible. Those pla ys, where there's nothing but helicopters flying about and y ou feel the people kissing." He made a grimace. "Goats and monk eys!" Only in Othello's word could he find an adequate v ehicle for his contempt and hatred."Nice tame animals, an yhow," the Controller murmured parentheti-cally."Why don't y ou let them see Othello instead?""I've told y ou; it's old. Besides, they couldn't understand it."Yes, that w as true. He remembered how Helmholtz had laughed at Romeo and Juliet. "Well then," he said, after a pause, "something new that's lik e Othello, and that they could understand.""That's what we'v e all been w anting to write," said Helmholtz, breaking  a long silence."And it's what y ou nev er will write," said the Controller . "Because, if it were really lik e Othello nobody could understand it, howev er new it might be. And if were new , it couldn't possibly be lik e Othello.""Why not?""Yes, wh y not?" Helmholtz repeated. He too w as forgetting the un-pleasant realities of the situation. Green with anxiet y and apprehen-sion, only Bernard remembered them; the others ignored him. "Wh y not?""Because our world is not the same as Othello's world. Y ou can't mak e flivvers without steel– and y ou can't mak e tragedies without social in-stabilit y. The world's stable now . People are happ y; they get what they want, and they nev er want what they can't get. They're well off; they're safe; they're nev er ill; they're not afr aid of death; they're bliss-fully ignor ant of passion and old age; they're plagued with no mothers or fathers; they'v e got no wiv es, or children, or lo vers to feel strongly about; they're so conditioned that they pr actically can't help beha ving as they ought to beha ve. And if an ything should go wrong, there's soma. Which y ou go and chuck out of the window in the name of lib-erty, Mr. Savage. Liberty!" He laughed. "Expecting Deltas to know what  liberty is! And now expecting them to understand Othello! My good boy!"The Sa vage w as silent for a little. "All the same," he insisted obsti-nately , "Othello's good, Othello's better than those feelies.""Of course it is," the Controller agreed. "But that's the price we ha ve to pay for stabilit y. You've got to choose between happiness and what people used to call high art. W e've sacrificed the high art. W e have the feelies and the scent organ instead.""But they don't mean an ything.""They mean themselv es; they mean a lot of agreeable sensations to the audience.""But they're … they're told b y an idiot."The Controller laughed. "Y ou're not being v ery polite to y our friend, Mr . Watson. One of our most distinguished Emotional Engineers …""But he's right," said Helmholtz gloomily . "Because it is idiotic. W riting when there's nothing to sa y …""Precisely . But that requires the most enormous ingenuit y. You're mak-ing flivv ers out of the absolute minimum of steel– works of art out of practically nothing but pure sensation."The Sa vage shook his head. "It all seems to me quite horrible.""Of course it does. Actual happiness alw ays looks prett y squalid in comparison with the o ver-compensations for misery . And, of course, stabilit y isn't nearly so spectacular as instabilit y. And being contented has none of the glamour of a good fight against misfortune, none of the picturesqueness of a struggle with temptation, or a fatal o verthrow  by passion or doubt. Happiness is nev er grand.""I suppose not," said the Sa vage after a silence. "But need it be quite so bad as those twins?" He passed his hand o ver his ey es as though he  were trying to wipe a way the remembered image of those long rows of  identical midgets at the assembling tables, those queued-up twin-herds at the entr ance to the Brentford monor ail station, those human maggots sw arming round Linda's bed of death, the endlessly repeated face of his assailants. He look ed at his bandaged left hand and shud-dered. "Horrible!""But how useful! I see y ou don't lik e our Bokano vsky Groups; but, I assure y ou, they're the foundation on which ev erything else is built. They're the gyroscope that stabiliz es the rock et plane of state on its unswerving course." The deep v oice thrillingly vibr ated; the gesticulat-ing hand implied all space and the onrush of the irresistible machine. Mustapha Mond's or atory w as almost up to synthetic standards."I was wondering," said the Sa vage, "wh y you had them at all–seeing that y ou can get whatev er you want out of those bottles. Wh y don't you mak e everybody an Alpha Double Plus while y ou're about it?"Mustapha Mond laughed. "Because we ha ve no wish to ha ve our throats cut," he answered. "W e believ e in happiness and stabilit y. A societ y of Alphas couldn't fail to be unstable and miser able. Imagine a factory staffed b y Alphas–that is to sa y by separ ate and unrelated in-dividuals of good heredit y and conditioned so as to be capable (within limits) of making a free choice and assuming responsibilities. Imagine it!" he repeated.The Sa vage tried to imagine it, not v ery successfully ."It's an absurdit y. An Alpha-decanted, Alpha-conditioned man would go mad if he had to do Epsilon Semi-Moron work –go mad, or start smashing things up . Alphas can be completely socializ ed–but only on condition that y ou mak e them do Alpha work. Only an Epsilon can be expected to mak e Epsilon sacrifices, for the good reason that for him they aren't sacrifices; they're the line of least resistance. His condition-ing has laid down r ails along which he's got to run. He can't help him-self; he's foredoomed. Ev en after decanting, he's still inside a bot-tle–an invisible bottle of infantile and embry onic fixations. Each one of us, of course," the Controller meditativ ely continued, "goes through life inside a bottle. But if we happen to be Alphas, our bottles are, rela-tively speaking, enormous. W e should suffer acutely if we were con-fined in a narrower space. Y ou cannot pour upper -caste champagne-surrogate into lower -caste bottles. It's obvious theoretically . But it has also been pro ved in actual pr actice. The result of the Cyprus experi-ment w as con vincing.""What w as that?" ask ed the Sa vage.Mustapha Mond smiled. "W ell, you can call it an experiment in rebot-tling if y ou lik e. It began in A.F . 473. The Controllers had the island of Cyprus cleared of all its existing inhabitants and re-coloniz ed with a specially prepared batch of twent y-two thousand Alphas. All agricul-tural and industrial equipment w as handed o ver to them and they were  left to manage their own affairs. The result exactly fulfilled all the theoretical predictions. The land w asn't properly work ed; there were strikes in all the factories; the la ws were set at naught, orders dis-obeyed; all the people detailed for a spell of low -grade work were per-petually intriguing for high-gr ade jobs, and all the people with high-grade jobs were counter -intriguing at all costs to sta y where they were. Within six y ears they were ha ving a first -class civil w ar. When nineteen out of the twent y-two thousand had been killed, the surviv ors unanimously petitioned the W orld Controllers to resume the go vern-ment of the island. Which they did. And that w as the end of the only societ y of Alphas that the world has ev er seen."The Sa vage sighed, profoundly ."The optimum population," said Mustapha Mond, "is modelled on the iceberg–eight -ninths below the w ater line, one-ninth abo ve.""And they're happ y below the w ater line?""Happier than abo ve it. Happier than y our friend here, for example." He pointed."In spite of that a wful work?""Awful? They don't find it so . On the contr ary, they lik e it. It's light, it's  childishly simple. No str ain on the mind or the muscles. Sev en and a half hours of mild, unexhausting labour , and then the soma ration and games and unrestricted copulation and the feelies. What more can they ask for? T rue," he added, "they might ask for shorter hours. And of course we could giv e them shorter hours. T echnically , it would be perfectly simple to reduce all lower -caste working hours to three or four a da y. But would they be an y the happier for that? No , they wouldn't. The experiment w as tried, more than a century and a half ago. The whole of Ireland w as put on to the four -hour da y. What w as the result? Unrest and a large increase in the consumption of soma; that w as all. Those three and a half hours of extr a leisure were so far from being a source of happiness, that people felt constr ained to tak e a holida y from them. The In ventions Office is stuffed with plans for labour -saving processes. Thousands of them." Mustapha Mond made a  lavish gesture. "And wh y don't we put them into ex ecution? F or the sake of the labourers; it would be sheer cruelt y to afflict them with ex-cessiv e leisure. It's the same with agriculture. W e could synthesiz e every morsel of food, if we w anted to . But we don't. W e prefer to k eep a third of the population on the land. F or their own sak es–because it takes longer to get food out of the land than out of a factory . Besides, we ha ve our stabilit y to think of . We don't w ant to change. Ev ery change is a menace to stabilit y. That's another reason wh y we're so chary of applying new in ventions. Ev ery disco very in pure science is potentially subv ersive; even science must sometimes be treated as a possible enem y. Yes, ev en science."Science? The Sa vage frowned. He knew the word. But what it exactly signified he could not sa y. Shak espeare and the old men of the pueblo had nev er mentioned science, and from Linda he had only gathered the vaguest hints: science w as something y ou made helicopters with, some thing that caused y ou to laugh at the Corn Dances, something that prev ented y ou from being wrinkled and losing y our teeth. He made a desper ate effort to tak e the Controller's meaning."Yes," Mustapha Mond w as saying, "that's another item in the cost of stabilit y. It isn't only art that's incompatible with happiness; it's also science. Science is dangerous; we ha ve to k eep it most carefully chained and muzzled.""What?" said Helmholtz, in astonishment. "But we're alw ays saying that science is ev erything. It's a h ypnopædic platitude.""Three times a week between thirteen and sev enteen," put in Bernard."And all the science propaganda we do at the College …""Yes; but what sort of science?" ask ed Mustapha Mond sarcastically . "You've had no scientific tr aining, so y ou can't judge. I w as a prett y good ph ysicist in m y time. T oo good–good enough to realiz e that all our science is just a cook ery book, with an orthodo x theory of cooking that nobody's allowed to question, and a list of recipes that mustn't be added to ex cept b y special permission from the head cook. I'm the head cook now . But I w as an inquisitiv e young scullion once. I started doing a bit of cooking on m y own. Unorthodo x cooking, illicit cooking. A bit of real science, in fact." He w as silent."What happened?" ask ed Helmholtz W atson.The Controller sighed. "V ery nearly what's going to happen to y ou young men. I w as on the point of being sent to an island."The words galv anized Bernard into violent and unseemly activit y. "Send me to an island?" He jumped up , ran across the room, and stood gesticulating in front of the Controller . "You can't send me. I haven't done an ything. lt w as the others. I swear it w as the others." He pointed accusingly to Helmholtz and the Sa vage. "Oh, please don't send me to Iceland. I promise I'll do what I ought to do . Give me an-other chance. Please giv e me another chance." The tears began to flow. "I tell y ou, it's their fault," he sobbed. "And not to Iceland. Oh please, y our fordship , please …" And in a paro xysm of abjection he threw himself on his knees before the Controller . Mustapha Mond tried to mak e him get up; but Bernard persisted in his gro velling; the stream of words poured out inexhaustibly . In the end the Controller had to ring for his fourth secretary ."Bring three men," he ordered, "and tak e Mr. Marx into a bedroom. Give him a good soma vaporization and then put him to bed and lea ve him."The fourth secretary went out and returned with three green-uniformed twin footmen. Still shouting and sobbing. Bernard w as car-ried out."One would think he w as going to ha ve his throat cut," said the Con-troller , as the door closed. "Whereas, if he had the smallest sense, he'd  understand that his punishment is really a rew ard. He's being sent to an island. That's to sa y, he's being sent to a place where he'll meet the  most interesting set of men and women to be found an ywhere in the world. All the people who , for one reason or another , have got too self -consciously individual to fit into communit y-life. All the people who aren't satisfied with orthodo xy, who'v e got independent ideas of their own. Ev ery one, in a word, who's an y one. I almost en vy you, Mr . Wat-son."Helmholtz laughed. "Then wh y aren't y ou on an island y ourself ?""Because, finally , I preferred this," the Controller answered. "I w as given the choice: to be sent to an island, where I could ha ve got on with m y pure science, or to be tak en on to the Controllers' Council with  the prospect of succeeding in due course to an actual Controllership . I chose this and let the science go ." After a little silence, "Sometimes," he added, "I r ather regret the science. Happiness is a hard mas-ter–particularly other people's happiness. A much harder master , if one  isn't conditioned to accept it unquestioningly , than truth." He sighed, fell silent again, then continued in a brisk er tone, "W ell, dut y's dut y. One can't consult one's own preference. I'm interested in truth, I lik e science. But truth's a menace, science is a public danger . As dangerous  as it's been beneficent. It has giv en us the stablest equilibrium in his-tory. China's w as hopelessly insecure b y comparison; ev en the primi-tive matriarchies weren't steadier than we are. Thanks, l repeat, to science. But we can't allow science to undo its own good work. That's why we so carefully limit the scope of its researches–that's wh y I al-most got sent to an island. W e don't allow it to deal with an y but the most immediate problems of the moment. All other enquiries are most  sedulously discour aged. It's curious," he went on after a little pause, "to read what people in the time of Our F ord used to write about scien-tific progress. They seemed to ha ve imagined that it could be allowed to go on indefinitely , regardless of ev erything else. Knowledge w as the  highest good, truth the supreme v alue; all the rest w as secondary and subordinate. T rue, ideas were beginning to change ev en then. Our F ord himself did a great deal to shift the emphasis from truth and beaut y to comfort and happiness. Mass production demanded the shift. Univ ersal happiness k eeps the wheels steadily turning; truth and beaut y can't. And, of course, whenev er the masses seiz ed political power , then it was happiness r ather than truth and beaut y that mattered. Still, in spite of ev erytung, unrestricted scientific research w as still permitted. People still went on talking about truth and beaut y as though they were the so vereign goods. Right up to the time of the Nine Y ears' W ar. That made them change their tune all right. What's the point of truth or beaut y or knowledge when the anthr ax bombs are popping all around y ou? That w as when science first began to be controlled– after the Nine Y ears' W ar. People were ready to ha ve even their appetites controlled then. An ything for a quiet life. W e've gone on controlling ever since. It hasn't been v ery good for truth, of course. But it's been very good for happiness. One can't ha ve something for nothing. Hap-piness has got to be paid for . You're pa ying for it, Mr . Watson–pa ying because y ou happen to be too much interested in beaut y. I was too much interested in truth; I paid too .""But you didn't go to an island," said the Sa vage, breaking a long si-lence.The Controller smiled. "That's how I paid. By choosing to serv e happi-ness. Other people's–not mine. It's lucky ," he added, after a pause, "that there are such a lot of islands in the world. I don't know what we  should do without them. Put y ou all in the lethal chamber , I suppose. By the w ay, Mr. Watson, would y ou lik e a tropical climate? The Mar-quesas, for example; or Samoa? Or something r ather more br acing?"Helmholtz rose from his pneumatic chair . "I should lik e a thoroughly bad climate," he answered. "I believ e one would write better if the cli-mate were bad. If there were a lot of wind and storms, for example …"The Controller nodded his approbation. "I lik e your spirit, Mr . Watson. I  like it very much indeed. As much as I officially disappro ve of it." He smiled. "What about the F alkland Islands?""Yes, I think that will do ," Helmholtz answered. "And now , if you don't mind, I'll go and see how poor Bernard's getting on."Chapter SeventeenART, SCIENCE– you seem to ha ve paid a fairly high price for y our hap-piness," said the Sa vage, when they were alone. "An ything else?""Well, religion, of course," replied the Controller . "There used to be something called God–before the Nine Y ears' W ar. But I w as forgetting;  you know all about God, I suppose.""Well …" The Sa vage hesitated. He would ha ve liked to sa y something about solitude, about night, about the mesa lying pale under the moon, about the precipice, the plunge into shadowy darkness, about death. He would ha ve liked to speak; but there were no words. Not even in Shak espeare.The Controller , mean while, had crossed to the other side of the room and w as unlocking a large safe set into the w all between the book-shelves. The hea vy door swung open. R ummaging in the darkness within, "It's a subject," he said, "that has alw ays had a great interest for me." He pulled out a thick black v olume. "Y ou've nev er read this, for example."The Sa vage took it. "The Holy Bible, containing the Old and New Tes-taments," he read aloud from the title-page."Nor this." It w as a small book and had lost its co ver."The Imitation of Christ.""Nor this." He handed out another v olume."The Varieties of Religious Experience. By William James.""And I'v e got plent y more," Mustapha Mond continued, resuming his seat. "A whole collection of pornogr aphic old books. God in the safe and F ord on the shelv es." He pointed with a laugh to his a vowed li-brary–to the shelv es of books, the r ack full of reading-machine bob-bins and sound-tr ack rolls."But if y ou know about God, wh y don't y ou tell them?" ask ed the Sa v-age indignantly . "Wh y don't y ou giv e them these books about God?""For the same reason as we don't giv e them Othello: they're old; they're about God hundreds of y ears ago . Not about God now .""But God doesn't change.""Men do , though.""What difference does that mak e?""All the difference in the world," said Mustapha Mond. He got up again and w alked to the safe. "There w as a man called Cardinal Newman," he said. "A cardinal," he ex claimed parenthetically , "was a kind of Arch-Communit y-Songster .""'I Pandulph, of fair Milan, cardinal.' I'v e read about them in Shak e-speare.""Of course y ou ha ve. Well, as I w as saying, there w as a man called Cardinal Newman. Ah, here's the book." He pulled it out. "And while I'm about it I'll tak e this one too . It's b y a man called Maine de Bir an. He was a philosopher , if you know what that w as.""A man who dreams of fewer things than there are in hea ven and earth," said the Sa vage promptly ."Quite so . I'll read y ou one of the things he did dream of in a moment.  Mean while, listen to what this old Arch-Communit y-Songster said." He opened the book at the place mark ed by a slip of paper and began to read. "'W e are not our own an y more than what we possess is our own. W e did not mak e ourselv es, we cannot be supreme o ver our-selves. W e are not our own masters. W e are God's propert y. Is it not our happiness thus to view the matter? Is it an y happiness or an y comfort, to consider that we are our own? It ma y be thought so b y the young and prosperous. These ma y think it a great thing to ha ve every-thing, as they suppose, their own w ay–to depend on no one–to ha ve to think of nothing out of sight, to be without the irksomeness of con-tinual acknowledgment, continual pr ayer, continual reference of what they do to the will of another . But as time goes on, they , as all men, will find that independence w as not made for man–that it is an unnatu-ral state– will do for a while, but will not carry us on safely to the end …'" Mustapha Mond paused, put down the first book and, picking up the other , turned o ver the pages. "T ake this, for example," he said, and in his deep v oice once more began to read: "' A man grows old; he feels in himself that r adical sense of weakness, of listlessness, of dis-comfort, which accompanies the adv ance of age; and, feeling thus, imagines himself merely sick, lulling his fears with the notion that this distressing condition is due to some particular cause, from which, as from an illness, he hopes to reco ver. Vain imaginings! That sickness is old age; and a horrible disease it is. They sa y that it is the fear of death and of what comes after death that mak es men turn to religion as they adv ance in y ears. But m y own experience has giv en me the conviction that, quite apart from an y such terrors or imaginings, the religious sentiment tends to dev elop as we grow older; to dev elop be-cause, as the passions grow calm, as the fancy and sensibilities are less ex cited and less ex citable, our reason becomes less troubled in its working, less obscured b y the images, desires and distr actions, in which it used to be absorbed; whereupon God emerges as from behind  a cloud; our soul feels, sees, turns tow ards the source of all light; turns natur ally and inevitably; for now that all that ga ve to the world of sensations its life and charms has begun to leak a way from us, now that phenomenal existence is no more bolstered up b y impressions from within or from without, we feel the need to lean on something that abides, something that will nev er pla y us false– a realit y, an abso-lute and ev erlasting truth. Y es, we inevitably turn to God; for this re-ligious sentiment is of its nature so pure, so delightful to the soul that experiences it, that it mak es up to us for all our other losses.'" Musta-pha Mond shut the book and leaned back in his chair . "One of the nu-merous things in hea ven and earth that these philosophers didn't dream about w as this" (he w aved his hand), "us, the modern world. 'You can only be independent of God while y ou've got y outh and pros-perity; independence won't tak e you safely to the end.' W ell, we'v e now got y outh and prosperit y right up to the end. What follows? Evi-dently , that we can be independent of God. 'The religious sentiment will compensate us for all our losses.' But there aren't an y losses for us  to compensate; religious sentiment is superfluous. And wh y should we go hunting for a substitute for y outhful desires, when y outhful desires never fail? A substitute for distr actions, when we go on enjo ying all the  old fooleries to the v ery last? What need ha ve we of repose when our minds and bodies continue to delight in activit y? of consolation, when we ha ve soma? of something immo vable, when there is the social or-der?""Then y ou think there is no God?""No, I think there quite probably is one.""Then wh y? …"Mustapha Mond check ed him. "But he manifests himself in different ways to different men. In premodern times he manifested himself as the being that's described in these books. Now …""How does he manifest himself now?" ask ed the Sa vage."Well, he manifests himself as an absence; as though he weren't there at all.""That's y our fault.""Call it the fault of civilization. God isn't compatible with machinery and scientific medicine and univ ersal happiness. Y ou must mak e your choice. Our civilization has chosen machinery and medicine and happi-ness. That's wh y I ha ve to k eep these books lock ed up in the safe. They're smut. P eople would be shock ed it …"The Sa vage interrupted him. "But isn't it natural to feel there's a God?""You might as well ask if it's natur al to do up one's trousers with zip-pers," said the Controller sarcastically . "You remind me of another of those old fellows called Br adley. He defined philosoph y as the finding of bad reason for what one believ es by instinct. As if one believ ed an y-thing b y instinct! One believ es things because one has been condi-tioned to believ e them. Finding bad reasons for what one believ es for other bad reasons–that's philosoph y. People believ e in God because they'v e been conditioned to ."But all the same," insisted the Sa vage, "it is natur al to believ e in God when y ou're alone–quite alone, in the night, thinking about death …""But people nev er are alone now ," said Mustapha Mond. "W e mak e them hate solitude; and we arr ange their liv es so that it's almost im-possible for them ev er to ha ve it."The Sa vage nodded gloomily . At Malpais he had suffered because they had shut him out from the communal activities of the pueblo , in civi-lized London he w as suffering because he could nev er escape from those communal activities, nev er be quietly alone."Do y ou remember that bit in King Lear?" said the Sa vage at last. "'The gods are just and of our pleasant vices mak e instruments to plague us; the dark and vicious place where thee he got cost him his eyes,' and Edmund answers– you remember , he's wounded, he's dy-ing–'Thou hast spok en right; 'tis true. The wheel has come full circle; I  am here.' What about that now? Doesn't there seem to be a God man-aging things, punishing, rew arding?""Well, does there?" questioned the Controller in his turn. "Y ou can in-dulge in an y number of pleasant vices with a freemartin and run no risks of ha ving y our ey es put out b y your son's mistress. 'The wheel has come full circle; I am here.' But where would Edmund be now a-days? Sitting in a pneumatic chair , with his arm round a girl's w aist, sucking a way at his sex -hormone chewing-gum and looking at the feelies. The gods are just. No doubt. But their code of la w is dictated, in the last resort, b y the people who organiz e societ y; Pro vidence takes its cue from men.""Are y ou sure?" ask ed the Sa vage. "Are y ou quite sure that the Ed-mund in that pneumatic chair hasn't been just as hea vily punished as the Edmund who's wounded and bleeding to death? The gods are just. Haven't they used his pleasant vices as an instrument to degr ade him?""Degr ade him from what position? As a happ y, hard- working, goods-consuming citiz en he's perfect. Of course, if y ou choose some other standard than ours, then perhaps y ou might sa y he w as degr aded. But  you've got to stick to one set of postulates. Y ou can't pla y Electro-magnetic Golf according to the rules of Centrifugal Bumble-pupp y.""But v alue dwells not in particular will," said the Sa vage. "It holds his estimate and dignit y as well wherein 'tis precious of itself as in the prizer.""Come, come," protested Mustapha Mond, "that's going r ather far , isn't  it?""If you allowed y ourselv es to think of God, y ou wouldn't allow y our-selves to be degr aded b y pleasant vices. Y ou'd ha ve a reason for bear-ing things patiently , for doing things with cour age. I'v e seen it with the  Indians.""l'm sure y ou ha ve," said Mustapha Mond. "But then we aren't Indians.  There isn't an y need for a civiliz ed man to bear an ything that's seri-ously unpleasant. And as for doing things–F ord forbid that he should get the idea into his head. It would upset the whole social order if men  started doing things on their own.""What about self -denial, then? If y ou had a God, y ou'd ha ve a reason for self -denial.""But industrial civilization is only possible when there's no self -denial. Self-indulgence up to the v ery limits imposed b y hygiene and econom-ics. Otherwise the wheels stop turning.""You'd ha ve a reason for chastit y!" said the Sa vage, blushing a little as  he spok e the words."But chastit y means passion, chastit y means neur asthenia. And pas-sion and neur asthenia mean instabilit y. And instabilit y means the end of civilization. Y ou can't ha ve a lasting civilization without plent y of pleasant vices.""But God's the reason for ev erything noble and fine and heroic. If y ou had a God …""My dear y oung friend," said Mustapha Mond, "civilization has abso-lutely no need of nobilit y or heroism. These things are symptoms of political inefficiency . In a properly organiz ed societ y like ours, nobody has an y opportunities for being noble or heroic. Conditions ha ve got to  be thoroughly unstable before the occasion can arise. Where there are wars, where there are divided allegiances, where there are tempta-tions to be resisted, objects of lo ve to be fought for or defended–there,  obviously , nobilit y and heroism ha ve some sense. But there aren't an y wars now adays. The greatest care is tak en to prev ent you from lo ving any one too much. There's no such thing as a divided allegiance; you're so conditioned that y ou can't help doing what y ou ought to do . And what y ou ought to do is on the whole so pleasant, so man y of the natur al impulses are allowed free pla y, that there really aren't an y temptations to resist. And if ev er, by some unlucky chance, an ything unpleasant should somehow happen, wh y, there's alw ays soma to giv e you a holida y from the facts. And there's alw ays soma to calm y our anger , to reconcile y ou to y our enemies, to mak e you patient and long-suffering. In the past y ou could only accomplish these things b y mak-ing a great effort and after y ears of hard mor al training. Now , you swallow two or three half -gramme tablets, and there y ou are. An ybody  can be virtuous now . You can carry at least half y our mortalit y about in  a bottle. Christianit y without tears–that's what soma is.""But the tears are necessary . Don't y ou remember what Othello said? 'If after ev ery tempest came such calms, ma y the winds blow till they have wakened death.' There's a story one of the old Indians used to tell us, about the Girl of Mátaski. The y oung men who w anted to marry  her had to do a morning's hoeing in her garden. It seemed easy; but there were flies and mosquitoes, magic ones. Most of the y oung men simply couldn't stand the biting and stinging. But the one that could–he got the girl.""Charming! But in civiliz ed countries," said the Controller , "you can have girls without hoeing for them, and there aren't an y flies or mos-quitoes to sting y ou. W e got rid of them all centuries ago ."The Sa vage nodded, frowning. "Y ou got rid of them. Y es, that's just like you. Getting rid of ev erything unpleasant instead of learning to put  up with it. Whether 'tis better in the mind to suffer the slings and ar-rows of outr ageous fortune, or to tak e arms against a sea of troubles and b y opposing end them … But y ou don't do either . Neither suffer nor oppose. Y ou just abolish the slings and arrows. It's too easy ."He was suddenly silent, thinking of his mother . In her room on the thirty-seventh floor , Linda had floated in a sea of singing lights and perfumed caresses–floated a way, out of space, out of time, out of the prison of her memories, her habits, her aged and bloated body . And Tomakin, ex -Director of Hatcheries and Conditioning, T omakin w as still on holida y–on holida y from humiliation and pain, in a world where he could not hear those words, that derisiv e laughter , could not see that hideous face, feel those moist and flabb y arms round his neck, in a beautiful world …"What y ou need," the Sa vage went on, "is something with tears for a change. Nothing costs enough here."("Twelve and a half million dollars," Henry F oster had protested when the Sa vage told him that. "T welve and a half million–that's what the new Conditioning Centre cost. Not a cent less.")"Exposing what is mortal and unsure to all that fortune, death and danger dare, ev en for an eggshell. Isn't there something in that?" he asked, looking up at Mustapha Mond. "Quite apart from God–though of  course God would be a reason for it. Isn't there something in living dangerously?""There's a great deal in it," the Controller replied. "Men and women must ha ve their adrenals stimulated from time to time.""What?" questioned the Sa vage, uncomprehending."It's one of the conditions of perfect health. That's wh y we'v e made the V.P.S. treatments compulsory .""V.P.S.?""Violent P assion Surrogate. R egularly once a month. W e flood the whole system with adrenin. It's the complete ph ysiological equiv alent of fear and r age. All the tonic effects of murdering Desdemona and be-ing murdered b y Othello , without an y of the incon veniences.""But I lik e the incon veniences.""We don't," said the Controller . "We prefer to do things comfortably .""But I don't w ant comfort. I w ant God, I w ant poetry , I want real dan-ger, I want freedom, I w ant goodness. I w ant sin.""In fact," said Mustapha Mond, "y ou're claiming the right to be un-happy.""All right then," said the Sa vage defiantly , "I'm claiming the right to be  unhapp y.""Not to mention the right to grow old and ugly and impotent; the right to have syphilis and cancer; the right to ha ve too little to eat; the right  to be lousy; the right to liv e in constant apprehension of what ma y happen to-morrow; the right to catch t yphoid; the right to be tortured by unspeakable pains of ev ery kind." There w as a long silence."I claim them all," said the Sa vage at last.Mustapha Mond shrugged his shoulders. "Y ou're welcome," he said.Chapter EighteenTHE DOOR w as ajar; they entered."John!"From the bathroom came an unpleasant and char acteristic sound."Is there an ything the matter?" Helmholtz called.There w as no answer . The unpleasant sound w as repeated, twice; there w as silence. Then, with a click the bathroom door opened and, very pale, the Sa vage emerged."I say," Helmholtz ex claimed solicitously , "you do look ill, John!""Did y ou eat something that didn't agree with y ou?" ask ed Bernard.The Sa vage nodded. "I ate civilization.""What?""It poisoned me; I w as defiled. And then," he added, in a lower tone, "I ate m y own wick edness.""Yes, but what exactly? … I mean, just now y ou were …""Now I am purified," said the Sa vage. "I dr ank some mustard and warm w ater."The others stared at him in astonishment. "Do y ou mean to sa y that you were doing it on purpose?" ask ed Bernard."That's how the Indians alw ays purif y themselv es." He sat down and, sighing, passed his hand across his forehead. "I shall rest for a few minutes," he said. "I'm r ather tired.""Well, I'm not surprised," said Helmholtz. After a silence, "W e've come to say good-b ye," he went on in another tone. "W e're off to-morrow morning.""Yes, we're off to-morrow ," said Bernard on whose face the Sa vage remark ed a new expression of determined resignation. "And b y the way, John," he continued, leaning forw ard in his chair and la ying a hand on the Sa vage's knee, "I w ant to sa y how sorry I am about ev e-rything that happened y esterda y." He blushed. "How ashamed," he went on, in spite of the unsteadiness of his v oice, "how really …"The Sa vage cut him short and, taking his hand, affectionately pressed it."Helmholtz w as wonderful to me," Bernard resumed, after a little pause. "If it hadn't been for him, I should …""Now, now ," Helmholtz protested.There w as a silence. In spite of their sadness–because of it, ev en; for their sadness w as the symptom of their lo ve for one another –the three  young men were happ y."I went to see the Controller this morning," said the Sa vage at last."What for?""To ask if I mightn't go to the islands with y ou.""And what did he sa y?" ask ed Helmholtz eagerly .The Sa vage shook his head. "He wouldn't let me.""Why not?""He said he w anted to go on with the experiment. But I'm damned," the Sa vage added, with sudden fury , "I'm damned if I'll go on being experimented with. Not for all the Controllers in the world. l shall go away to-morrow too .""But where?" the others ask ed in unison.The Sa vage shrugged his shoulders. "An ywhere. I don't care. So long as I can be alone."From Guildford the down-line followed the W ey valley to Godalming, then, o ver Milford and Witley , proceeded to Haslemere and on through Petersfield tow ards P ortsmouth. R oughly par allel to it, the upline passed o ver Worplesden, T ongham, Puttenham, Elstead and Gr ayshott.  Between the Hog's Back and Hindhead there were points where the two lines were not more than six or sev en kilometres apart. The dis-tance w as too small for careless fly ers–particularly at night and when they had tak en half a gr amme too much. There had been accidents. Serious ones. It had been decided to deflect the upline a few kilome-tres to the west. Between Gr ayshott and T ongham four abandoned air -lighthouses mark ed the course of the old P ortsmouth-to-London road. The skies abo ve them were silent and deserted. It w as over Selborne, Bordon and F arnham that the helicopters now ceaselessly hummed and roared.The Sa vage had chosen as his hermitage the old light -house which stood on the crest of the hill between Puttenham and Elstead. The building w as of ferro-concrete and in ex cellent condition– almost too comfortable the Sa vage had thought when he first explored the place, almost too civiliz edly luxurious. He pacified his conscience b y promis-ing himself a compensatingly harder self -discipline, purifications the more complete and thorough. His first night in the hermitage w as, de-liberately, a sleepless one. He spent the hours on his knees pr aying, now to that Hea ven from which the guilt y Claudius had begged for-giveness, now in Zuñi to A wona wilona, now to Jesus and P ookong, now  to his own guardian animal, the eagle. From time to time he stretched out his arms as though he were on the Cross, and held them thus through long minutes of an ache that gr adually increased till it became  a tremulous and ex cruciating agon y; held them, in v oluntary crucifix-ion, while he repeated, through clenched teeth (the sweat, mean while, pouring down his face), "Oh, forgiv e me! Oh, mak e me pure! Oh, help me to be good!" again and again, till he w as on the point of fainting from the pain.When morning came, he felt he had earned the right to inhabit the lighthouse; y et, ev en though there still w as glass in most of the win-dows, ev en though the view from the platform w as so fine. F or the very reason wh y he had chosen the lighthouse had become almost in-stantly a reason for going somewhere else. He had decided to liv e there because the view w as so beautiful, because, from his v antage point, he seemed to be looking out on to the incarnation of a divine being. But who w as he to be pampered with the daily and hourly sight of loveliness? Who w as he to be living in the visible presence of God? All he deserv ed to liv e in w as some filth y sty, some blind hole in the ground. Stiff and still aching after his long night of pain, but for that very reason in wardly reassured, he climbed up to the platform of his tower , he look ed out o ver the bright sunrise world which he had re-gained the right to inhabit. On the north the view w as bounded b y the long chalk ridge of the Hog's Back, from behind whose eastern extrem-ity rose the towers of the sev en skyscr apers which constituted Guild-ford. Seeing them, the Sa vage made a grimace; but he w as to become  reconciled to them in course of time; for at night they twinkled gaily with geometrical constellations, or else, flood-lighted, pointed their luminous fingers (with a gesture whose significance nobody in England  but the Sa vage now understood) solemnly tow ards the plumbless m ys-teries of hea ven.In the v alley which separ ated the Hog's Back from the sandy hill on which the lighthouse stood, Puttenham w as a modest little village nine stories high, with silos, a poultry farm, and a small vitamin-D factory . On the other side of the lighthouse, tow ards the South, the ground fell away in long slopes of heather to a chain of ponds.Beyond them, abo ve the interv ening woods, rose the fourteen-story tower of Elstead. Dim in the hazy English air , Hindhead and Selborne invited the ey e into a blue romantic distance. But it w as not alone the distance that had attr acted the Sa vage to his lighthouse; the near w as as seductiv e as the far . The woods, the open stretches of heather and yellow gorse, the clumps of Scotch firs, the shining ponds with their overhanging birch trees, their w ater lilies, their beds of rushes–these were beautiful and, to an ey e accustomed to the aridities of the Ameri-can desert, astonishing. And then the solitude! Whole da ys passed during which he nev er saw a human being. The lighthouse w as only a quarter of an hour's flight from the Charing- T Tower; but the hills of Malpais were hardly more deserted than this Surrey heath. The crowds  that daily left London, left it only to pla y Electro-magnetic Golf or T en-nis. Puttenham possessed no links; the nearest Riemann-surfaces were at Guildford. Flowers and a landscape were the only attr actions here. And so , as there w as no good reason for coming, nobody came. During the first da ys the Sa vage liv ed alone and undisturbed.Of the money which, on his first arriv al, John had receiv ed for his per-sonal expenses, most had been spent on his equipment. Before lea ving London he had bought four viscose- woollen blank ets, rope and string, nails, glue, a few tools, matches (though he intended in due course to make a fire drill), some pots and pans, two doz en pack ets of seeds, and ten kilogr ammes of wheat flour . "No, not synthetic starch and cotton- waste flour -substitute," he had insisted. "Ev en though it is more nourishing." But when it came to pan-glandular biscuits and vi-taminiz ed beef -surrogate, he had not been able to resist the shop-man's persuasion. Looking at the tins now , he bitterly reproached him-self for his weakness. Loathesome civiliz ed stuff! He had made up his mind that he would nev er eat it, ev en if he were starving. "That'll teach them," he thought vindictiv ely. It would also teach him.He counted his money . The little that remained would be enough, he hoped, to tide him o ver the winter . By next spring, his garden would be producing enough to mak e him independent of the outside world. Mean while, there would alw ays be game. He had seen plent y of r ab-bits, and there were w aterfowl on the ponds. He set to work at once to  make a bow and arrows.There were ash trees near the lighthouse and, for arrow shafts, a whole copse full of beautifully str aight haz el saplings. He began b y fell-ing a y oung ash, cut out six feet of unbr anched stem, stripped off the bark and, paring b y paring, sha ved away the white wood, as old Mit-sima had taught him, until he had a sta ve of his own height, stiff at the thick ened centre, liv ely and quick at the slender tips. The work gave him an intense pleasure. After those weeks of idleness in London,  with nothing to do , whenev er he w anted an ything, but to press a switch or turn a handle, it w as pure delight to be doing something that  demanded skill and patience.He had almost finished whittling the sta ve into shape, when he real-ized with a start that he w as singing-singing! It was as though, stum-bling upon himself from the outside, he had suddenly caught himself out, tak en himself flagr antly at fault. Guiltily he blushed. After all, it was not to sing and enjo y himself that he had come here. It w as to es-cape further contamination b y the filth of civiliz ed life; it w as to be pu-rified and made good; it w as activ ely to mak e amends. He realiz ed to his disma y that, absorbed in the whittling of his bow , he had forgotten what he had sworn to himself he would constantly remember –poor Linda, and his own murderous unkindness to her , and those loathsome  twins, sw arming lik e lice across the m ystery of her death, insulting, with their presence, not merely his own grief and repentance, but the very gods themselv es. He had sworn to remember , he had sworn un-ceasingly to mak e amends. And there w as he, sitting happily o ver his bow-stave, singing, actually singing. …He went indoors, opened the bo x of mustard, and put some w ater to boil on the fire.Half an hour later , three Delta-Minus landwork ers from one of the Put-tenham Bokano vsky Groups happened to be driving to Elstead and, at the top of the hill, were astonished to see a y oung man standing 0ut-side the abandoned lighthouse stripped to the w aist and hitting himself  with a whip of knotted cords. His back w as horiz ontally streak ed with crimson, and from weal to weal r an thin trickles of blood. The driv er of the lorry pulled up at the side of the road and, with his two compan-ions, stared open-mouthed at the extr aordinary spectacle. One, two three–they counted the strok es. After the eighth, the y oung man inter-rupted his self -punishment to run to the wood's edge and there be vio-lently sick. When he had finished, he pick ed up the whip and began hitting himself again. Nine, ten, elev en, twelv e …"Ford!" whispered the driv er. And his twins were of the same opinion."Fordey!" they said.Three da ys later , like turk ey buzzards settling on a corpse, the report-ers came.Dried and hardened o ver a slow fire of green wood, the bow w as ready . The Sa vage w as busy on his arrows. Thirt y haz el sticks had been whittled and dried, tipped with sharp nails, carefully nock ed. He had made a r aid one night on the Puttenham poultry farm, and now had feathers enough to equip a whole armoury . It w as at work upon the feathering of his shafts that the first of the reporters found him. Noiseless on his pneumatic shoes, the man came up behind him."Good-morning, Mr . Savage," he said. "I am the representativ e of The Hourly Radio."Startled as though b y the bite of a snak e, the Sa vage spr ang to his feet, scattering arrows, feathers, glue-pot and brush in all directions."I beg y our pardon," said the reporter , with genuine compunction. "I had no intention …" He touched his hat –the aluminum sto ve-pipe hat in which he carried his wireless receiv er and tr ansmitter . "Excuse m y not taking it off ," he said. "It's a bit hea vy. Well, as I w as saying, I am the representativ e of The Hourly …""What do y ou want?" ask ed the Sa vage, scowling. The reporter re-turned his most ingr atiating smile."Well, of course, our readers would be profoundly interested …" He put  his head on one side, his smile became almost coquettish. "Just a few words from y ou, Mr . Savage." And r apidly , with a series of ritual ges-tures, he uncoiled two wires connected to the portable battery buckled  round his w aist; plugged them simultaneously into the sides of his aluminum hat; touched a spring on the crown– and antennæ shot up into the air; touched another spring on the peak of the brim– and, lik e a jack -in-the-bo x, out jumped a microphone and hung there, quiv er-ing, six inches in front of his nose; pulled down a pair of receiv ers over his ears; pressed a switch on the left side of the hat -and from within came a faint w aspy buzzing; turned a knob on the right –and the buzz-ing w as interrupted b y a stethoscopic wheez e and cackle, b y hiccoughs  and sudden squeaks. "Hullo ," he said to the microphone, "hullo , hullo …" A bell suddenly r ang inside his hat. "Is that y ou, Edz el? Primo Mel-lon speaking. Y es, I'v e got hold of him. Mr . Savage will now tak e the microphone and sa y a few words. W on't y ou, Mr . Savage?" He look ed up at the Sa vage with another of those winning smiles of his. "Just tell our readers wh y you came here. What made y ou lea ve London (hold on, Edz el!) so v ery suddenly . And, of course, that whip ." (The Sa vage started. How did they know about the whip?) "W e're all cr azy to know about the whip . And then something about Civilization. Y ou know the sort of stuff . 'What I think of the Civiliz ed Girl.' Just a few words, a very few …"The Sa vage obey ed with a disconcerting liter alness. Fiv e words he ut-tered and no more-fiv e words, the same as those he had said to Ber-nard about the Arch-Communit y-Songster of Canterbury . "Háni! Sons éso tse-ná!" And seizing the reporter b y the shoulder , he spun him round (the y oung man rev ealed himself in vitingly well-co vered), aimed  and, with all the force and accur acy of a champion foot -and-mouth-baller , deliv ered a most prodigious kick.Eight minutes later , a new edition of The Hourly Radio was on sale in the streets of London. "HOURL Y RADIO REPOR TER HA S COCCYX KICKED BY MYSTER Y SAVAGE," r an the headlines on the front page. "SENS ATION IN SURREY .""Sensation ev en in London," thought the reporter when, on his return, he read the words. And a v ery painful sensation, what w as more. He sat down gingerly to his luncheon.Undeterred b y that cautionary bruise on their colleague's coccyx, four other reporters, representing the New Y ork Times, the Fr ankfurt Four-Dimensional Continuum, The Fordian Science Monitor, and The Delta Mirror, called that afternoon at the lighthouse and met with receptions of progressiv ely increasing violence.From a safe distance and still rubbing his buttocks, "Benighted fool!" shouted the man from The Fordian Science Monitor, "why don't y ou take soma?""Get a way!" The Sa vage shook his fist.The other retreated a few steps then turned round again. "Evil's an un-reality if you tak e a couple of gr ammes.""Kohakwa iyathtokyai!" The tone w as menacingly derisiv e."Pain's a delusion.""Oh, is it?" said the Sa vage and, picking up a thick haz el switch, strode  forward.The man from The F ordian Science Monitor made a dash for his heli-copter .After that the Sa vage w as left for a time in peace. A few helicopters came and ho vered inquisitiv ely round the tower . He shot an arrow into the importunately nearest of them. It pierced the aluminum floor of the cabin; there w as a shrill y ell, and the machine went rock eting up into the air with all the acceler ation that its super -charger could giv e it. The others, in future, k ept their distance respectfully . Ignoring their tiresome humming (he lik ened himself in his imagination to one of the suitors of the Maiden of Mátsaki, unmo ved and persistent among the winged v ermin), the Sa vage dug at what w as to be his garden. After a time the v ermin evidently became bored and flew a way; for hours at a  stretch the sky abo ve his head w as empt y and, but for the larks, si-lent.The weather w as breathlessly hot, there w as thunder in the air . He had  dug all the morning and w as resting, stretched out along the floor . And  suddenly the thought of Lenina w as a real presence, nak ed and tangi-ble, sa ying "S weet!" and "Put y our arms round me!"–in shoes and socks, perfumed. Impudent strumpet! But oh, oh, her arms round his neck, the lifting of her breasts, her mouth! Eternit y was in our lips and  eyes. Lenina … No , no, no, no! He spr ang to his feet and, half nak ed as  he was, ran out of the house. A t the edge of the heath stood a clump of hoary juniper bushes. He flung himself against them, he embr aced, not the smooth body of his desires, but an armful of green spik es. Sharp , with a thousand points, they prick ed him. He tried to think of poor Linda, breathless and dumb , with her clutching hands and the unutter able terror in her ey es. Poor Linda whom he had sworn to re-member . But it w as still the presence of Lenina that haunted him. Len-ina whom he had promised to forget. Ev en through the stab and sting of the juniper needles, his wincing flesh w as aware of her , unescapably  real. "S weet, sweet … And if y ou wanted me too , why didn't y ou …"The whip w as hanging on a nail b y the door , ready to hand against the arrival of reporters. In a frenzy the Sa vage ran back to the house, seized it, whirled it. The knotted cords bit into his flesh."Strumpet! Strumpet!" he shouted at ev ery blow as though it were Lenina (and how fr antically , without knowing it, he wished it were), white, w arm, scented, infamous Lenina that he w as dogging thus. "Strumpet!" And then, in a v oice of despair , "Oh, Linda, forgiv e me. Forgive me, God. I'm bad. I'm wick ed. I'm … No , no, you strumpet, you strumpet!"From his carefully constructed hide in the wood three hundred metres away, Darwin Bonaparte, the F eely Corpor ation's most expert big game photogr apher had w atched the whole proceedings. P atience and skill had been rew arded. He had spent three da ys sitting inside the bole of an artificial oak tree, three nights cr awling on his belly through the heather , hiding microphones in gorse bushes, burying wires in the soft grey sand. Sev enty-two hours of profound discomfort. But now me  great moment had come–the greatest, Darwin Bonaparte had time to reflect, as he mo ved among his instruments, the greatest since his taking of the famous all-howling stereoscopic feely of the gorillas' wedding. "Splendid," he said to himself , as the Sa vage started his as-tonishing performance. "Splendid!" He k ept his telescopic camer as carefully aimed–glued to their mo ving objectiv e; clapped on a higher power to get a close-up of the fr antic and distorted face (admir able!); switched o ver, for half a minute, to slow motion (an exquisitely comical  effect, he promised himself ); listened in, mean while, to the blows, the groans, the wild and r aving words that were being recorded on the sound-tr ack at the edge of his film, tried the effect of a little amplifica-tion (y es, that w as decidedly better); w as delighted to hear , in a mo-mentary lull, the shrill singing of a lark; wished the Sa vage would turn round so that he could get a good close-up of the blood on his back –and almost instantly (what astonishing luck!) the accommodating fel-low did turn round, and he w as able to tak e a perfect close-up ."Well, that w as grand!" he said to himself when it w as all o ver. "Really grand!" He mopped his face. When they had put in the feely effects at the studio , it would be a wonderful film. Almost as good, thought Dar-win Bonaparte, as the Sperm Whale's Love-Life–and that, b y Ford, w as saying a good deal!Twelve days later The Sa vage of Surrey had been released and could be seen, heard and felt in ev ery first -class feely -palace in W estern Europe.The effect of Darwin Bonaparte's film w as immediate and enormous. On the afternoon which followed the ev ening of its release John's rustic  solitude w as suddenly brok en by the arriv al overhead of a great sw arm of helicopters.He was digging in his garden–digging, too , in his own mind, laboriously  turning up the substance of his thought. Death– and he dro ve in his spade once, and again, and y et again. And all our y esterda ys ha ve lighted fools the w ay to dust y death. A con vincing thunder rumbled through the words. He lifted another spadeful of earth. Wh y had Linda died? Wh y had she been allowed to become gr adually less than human and at last … He shuddered. A good kissing carrion. He planted his foot  on his spade and stamped it fiercely into the tough ground. As flies to wanton bo ys are we to the gods; they kill us for their sport. Thunder again; words that proclaimed themselv es true–truer somehow than truth itself . And y et that same Gloucester had called them ev er-gentle gods. Besides, th y best of rest is sleep and that thou oft pro vok'st; y et grossly fear'st th y death which is no more. No more than sleep . Sleep . Perchance to dream. His spade struck against a stone; he stooped to pick it up . For in that sleep of death, what dreams? …A humming o verhead had become a roar; and suddenly he w as in shadow , there w as something between the sun and him. He look ed up , startled, from his digging, from his thoughts; look ed up in a dazzled bewilderment, his mind still w andering in that other world of truer -than-truth, still focused on the immensities of death and deit y; look ed up and sa w, close abo ve him, the sw arm of ho vering machines. Lik e locusts they came, hung poised, descended all around him on the heather . And from out of the bellies of these giant gr asshoppers stepped men in white viscose-flannels, women (for the weather w as hot) in acetate-shantung p yjamas or v elveteen shorts and sleev eless, half-unzippered singlets–one couple from each. In a few minutes there  were doz ens of them, standing in a wide circle round the lighthouse, staring, laughing, clicking their camer as, throwing (as to an ape) pea-nuts, pack ets of sex -hormone chewing-gum, pan-glandular petite beurres. And ev ery moment –for across the Hog's Back the stream of traffic now flowed unceasingly –their numbers increased. As in a nightmare, the doz ens became scores, the scores hundreds.The Sa vage had retreated tow ards co ver, and now , in the posture of an  animal at ba y, stood with his back to the w all of the lighthouse, staring  from face to face in speechless horror , like a man out of his senses.From this stupor he w as aroused to a more immediate sense of realit y by the impact on his cheek of a well- aimed pack et of chewing-gum. A shock of startling pain– and he w as broad a wake, awake and fiercely angry ."Go a way!" he shouted.The ape had spok en; there w as a burst of laughter and hand-clapping.  "Good old Sa vage! Hurr ah, hurr ah!" And through the babel he heard cries of: "Whip , whip , the whip!"Acting on the word's suggestion, he seiz ed the bunch of knotted cords from its nail behind the door and shook it at his tormentors.There w as a y ell of ironical applause.Menacingly he adv anced tow ards them. A woman cried out in fear . The line w avered at its most immediately threatened point, then stiffened again, stood firm. The consciousness of being in o verwhelming force had giv en these sightseers a cour age which the Sa vage had not ex-pected of them. T aken aback, he halted and look ed round."Why don't y ou lea ve me alone?" There w as an almost plaintiv e note in  his anger ."Have a few magnesium-salted almonds!" said the man who , if the Savage were to adv ance, would be the first to be attack ed. He held out  a pack et. "They're really v ery good, y ou know ," he added, with a rather nerv ous smile of propitiation. "And the magnesium salts will help to k eep y ou young."The Sa vage ignored his offer . "What do y ou want with me?" he ask ed, turning from one grinning face to another . "What do y ou want with me?""The whip ," answered a hundred v oices confusedly . "Do the whipping stunt. Let's see the whipping stunt."Then, in unison and on a slow , heavy rhythm, "W e-want-the whip ," shouted a group at the end of the line. "W e–want–the whip ."Others at once took up the cry , and the phr ase w as repeated, parrot -fashion, again and again, with an ev er-growing v olume of sound, until,  by the sev enth or eighth reiter ation, no other word w as being spok en. "We–want–the whip ."They were all crying together; and, into xicated b y the noise, the una-nimity, the sense of rh ythmical atonement, they might, it seemed, have gone on for hours- almost indefinitely . But at about the twent y-fifth repetition the proceedings were startlingly interrupted. Y et an-other helicopter had arriv ed from across the Hog's Back, hung poised above the crowd, then dropped within a few y ards of where the Sa v-age w as standing, in the open space between the line of sightseers and the lighthouse. The roar of the air screws momentarily drowned the shouting; then, as the machine touched the ground and the en-gines were turned off: "W e–want–the whip; we– want–the whip ," brok e out again in the same loud, insistent monotone.The door of the helicopter opened, and out stepped, first a fair and ruddy -faced y oung man, then, in green v elveteen shorts, white shirt, and jock ey cap , a young woman.At the sight of the y oung woman, the Sa vage started, recoiled, turned pale.The y oung woman stood, smiling at him– an uncertain, imploring, al-most abject smile. The seconds passed. Her lips mo ved, she w as say-ing something; but the sound of her v oice w as covered b y the loud re-iterated refr ain of the sightseers."We–want–the whip! W e–want–the whip!"The y oung woman pressed both hands to her left side, and on that peach-bright, doll-beautiful face of hers appeared a str angely incon-gruous expression of y earning distress. Her blue ey es seemed to grow larger , brighter; and suddenly two tears rolled down her cheeks. Inau-dibly, she spok e again; then, with a quick, impassioned gesture stretched out her arms tow ards the Sa vage, stepped forw ard."We–want–the whip! W e–want …"And all of a sudden they had what they w anted."Strumpet!" The Sa vage had rushed at her lik e a madman. "Fitchew!" Like a madman, he w as slashing at her with his whip of small cords.Terrified, she had turned to flee, had tripped and fallen in the heather . "Henry , Henry!" she shouted. But her ruddy -faced companion had bolted out of harm's w ay behind the helicopter .With a whoop of delighted ex citement the line brok e; there w as a con-vergent stampede tow ards that magnetic centre of attr action. P ain w as a fascinating horror ."Fry, lechery , fry!" Frenzied, the Sa vage slashed again.Hungrily they gathered round, pushing and scr ambling lik e swine about the trough."Oh, the flesh!" The Sa vage ground his teeth. This time it w as on his shoulders that the whip descended. "Kill it, kill it!"Drawn by the fascination of the horror of pain and, from within, im-pelled b y that habit of cooper ation, that desire for unanimit y and atonement, which their conditioning had so iner adicably implanted in them, they began to mime the frenzy of his gestures, striking at one another as the Sa vage struck at his own rebellious flesh, or at that plump incarnation of turpitude writhing in the heather at his feet."Kill it, kill it, kill it …" The Sa vage went on shouting.Then suddenly somebody started singing "Orgy -porgy" and, in a mo-ment, they had all caught up the refr ain and, singing, had begun to dance. Orgy -porgy , round and round and round, beating one another in six-eight time. Orgy -porgy …It was after midnight when the last of the helicopters took its flight. Stupefied b y soma, and exhausted b y a long-dr awn frenzy of sensual-ity, the Sa vage la y sleeping in the heather . The sun w as already high when he a woke. He la y for a moment, blinking in owlish incomprehen-sion at the light; then suddenly remembered–ev erything."Oh, m y God, m y God!" He co vered his ey es with his hand.That ev ening the sw arm of helicopters that came buzzing across the Hog's Back w as a dark cloud ten kilometres long. The description of last night's orgy of atonement had been in all the papers."Savage!" called the first arriv als, as they alighted from their machine.  "Mr. Savage!"There w as no answer .The door of the lighthouse w as ajar . They pushed it open and w alked into a shuttered twilight. Through an arch way on the further side of the room they could see the bottom of the staircase that led up to the higher floors. Just under the crown of the arch dangled a pair of feet."Mr. Savage!"Slowly , very slowly , like two unhurried compass needles, the feet turned tow ards the right; north, north-east, east, south-east, south, south-south- west; then paused, and, after a few seconds, turned as unhurriedly back tow ards the left. South-south- west, south, south-east, east. …